NO.
CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2018
The Minister of Environmental Affairs, Dr Bomo Edna Edith Molewa, hereby publishes
the Climate Change Bill, 2018 in the Schedule hereto, for public comment. Copies of
the socio- economic impact assessment report and memorandum of objects are
available at www.environment. ov.za
Members of the public are invited to submit to the Minister, within BO days of
publication of this notice in the Gazette, written inputs or comments to the following
addresses:
By post to: The Director General: Department of Environmental Affairs
Attention: Ms Dineo Ngobeni
Private Bag X447
Pretoria, 0001
By hand at: Environment House, 473 Steve Biko Street, Arcadia, Pretoria, 0001.
By email to: Climate environment. ov.za
Any inquiries in connection with the National Climate Change Bill, 2018 can be
directed to Mr Tlou Ramaru at (012) 399 9252, and Ms Deborah Ramalope at (012)
399 9160.
Public comments or Inputs received after 08 August 2018 may not be
considered.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
4 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018
Government Notices • Goewermentskennisgewings
Environmental Affairs, Department of/ Omgewingsake, Departement van
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
NO. 580 08 JUNE 2018 580 Climate Change Bill, 2018: For public comment 41689This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 5
(As introduced in the National Assembly (proposed section 76); explanatory 
summary of Bill published in Government Gazette 41689 of 8 June 2018) (The 
English text is the official text of the BillAND WHEREAS the Republic -
(a) is an emitter of the greenhouse gases identified by the international
community as the primary drivers of anthropogenic climate change, and for
AND WHEREAS anthropogenic climate change represents an urgent threat to
human societies and the planetary environment and requires an effective,
progressive and incremental response;
WHEREAS everyone has the Constitutional right to dignity, life and an environment
that is not harmful to their health and well- being, and to have the environment
protected for the benefit of present and future generations while allowing justifiable
environmentally sustainable economic and social development;
To build the Republic's effective climate change response and the long term,
Just transition to a climate resilient and lower carbon economy and society in
the context of an environmentally sustainable development framework; and to
provide for matters connected therewith.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
6 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018(b) support a just transition to a climate resilient, equitable and internationally
competitive lower carbon economy and society, that takes into account the
economic, employment and societal risks and opportunities that are expected to
arise as a consequence of implementing the national climate change response;
AND WHEREAS anticipated domestic climate change impacts have the potential to
undermine many of the gains made in meeting the Republic's developmental goals,
while implementing an effective national climate change response, set out in the
White Paper on National Climate Change Response and South Africa's Nationally
Determined Contribution communicated to the United Nations Convention on
Combating Climate Change secretariat in terms of its Paris Agreement, as may be
varied from time to time, will -
(a) contribute to the realisation of significant macro- economic, socio- economic and
environmental benefits, in a manner that is driven and customised in the light of
national circumstances; developmental; transformational; empowering and
participatory; dynamic and evidence- based; balanced and cost effective; and
(b) is especially vulnerable to those impacts of climate change that require urgent
and appropriate adaptation responses; and
(c) has committed, internationally, to communicate and implement an effective
nationally determined climate change response, including mitigation and
adaptation actions, that represents the Republic's fair contribution to the
global climate change response;
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 71. Definitions
2. Objects of Act
3. Principles
4. Application of Act
5. Conflict with other legislation
AND WHEREAS climate change policy need to be implemented in the context of an
environmentally sustainable development framework that integrates environmental,
economic and social development as well as employment objectives to achieve
AND WHEREAS responding to climate change raises unique challenges to effective
governance as its impact transcends and challenges traditionally sectoral
governance approaches which require a nationally driven, coordinated and
cooperative legal and administrative response that acknowledges the centrality of
the provincial and municipal spheres in achieving its objectives, thus making it
desirable to develop a legislative framework for the implementation of the Republic's
national climate change response in order to address these matters;
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
8 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018CHAPTER 5
11. National greenhouse gas emissions trajectory
12. Sectoral emissions targets
13. Carbon budgets
14. Phase down and phase out of synthetic greenhouse gas emissions and
declaration
6. National framework
7. Alignment of laws and policies
8. Institutional arrangements and coordination
CHAPTER 3
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 915. Regulations
16. Consultation
17. Public participation
18. Delegation
19. Offences and penalties
20. Appeals
21. Savings and transitional provisions
22. Short title and commencement
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
10 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018"direct greenhouse gases emissions" means
owned or controlled by the person;
"ecosystem" means a system of relationships between animals and plants and their
environment;
1. In this Act, unless the context indicates otherwise-
"adaptation" in relation to natural, human, social and ecological systems, means
the process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects, in order to
moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities; in relation to natural systems, the
process of adjustment to actual climate and its effects;
"adaptive capacity" means the ability of a system to adapt to the impacts, cope
with the consequences, minimise potential damages, or to take advantage of
opportunities offered by climate change or climate variability;
"carbon budget" means a greenhouse gas emissions allowance allocated to a
person in terms of section 13, over a defined time period;
"climate change" means a change of climate that is attributed directly or indirectly
to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and that is in
addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods;
"Department" means the national department responsible for environmental affairs;
"Disaster Management Act" means the Disaster Management Act, 2002 (Act No.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 11"national greenhouse gas emissions trajectory" means a benchmark against
which the efficacy of greenhouse gas emissions reduction actions will be measured;
"organ of state" has the meaning assigned to it in section 239 of the Constitution of
"Mayor" means an elected Mayor of a metropolitan, district or local municipality;
"MEC" means the member of the Executive Council to whom the Premier has
assigned responsibility for the environment;
"Minister" means the Cabinet Minister responsible for environmental affairs;
"Ministerial Committee on Climate Change" means the committee established in
terms of section 8(1) responsible for the coordination of climate change responses
within the Republic;
"mitigation" means a human intervention to reduce the emissions of greenhouse
gases by sources or enhancing their removal from the atmosphere by sinks;
"National Environmental Management Act" means the National Environmental
Management Act, 1998 (Act No. 107 of 1998);
"national greenhouse gas inventory" means the National Greenhouse Gas
Inventory which catalogues all the emissions of greenhouse gases from all sectors in
"environment" has the meaning assigned to it in section 1 of the National
Environmental Management Act;
"Functional Area" means the functional areas listed in Schedule;
"greenhouse gas" means gaseous constituents of the global atmosphere, both
natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and re -emit infrared radiation;
"Indirect greenhouse gases emissions" means emissions that
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
12 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018"sustainable development" has the meaning assigned to it in section 1 of the
National Environmental Management Act;
"synthetic greenhouse gas" means a man -made greenhouse gas such as
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs); perfluorocarbons (PFCs); and sulphur hexafluorides
"SETs" means Sectoral Emissions Targets which are greenhouse gas emission
allowances allocated to an emitting sector or sub -sector over a defined time period;
"SERP" means a sector emissions reduction plan required in terms of section 12(4)
the Republic of South Africa, 1996;
"person" means a natural person and includes a juristic person;
"prescribe" means to prescribe by regulation;
"Provincial Committee on Climate Change" means the committees established in
terms of section 8(9) responsible for the coordination of climate change responses
within a province;
"regulation" means a regulation made, and includes a notice issued, under this Act;
"resilience" means the ability of a social, economic or ecological system to absorb
disturbances while retaining the same basic structure and ways of functioning, the
capacity for self organisation and the capacity to adapt to stress and change;
"sector" means a collective term for a group of activities with similar characteristics
which either emit greenhouse gases or are vulnerable to climate change;
"sector department" means a department responsible for a Functional Area listed
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 132. The objects of the Act are to-
(a) provide for the coordinated and integrated response to climate change and its
impacts by all spheres of government in accordance with the principles of
cooperative governance;
(b) provide for the effective management of inevitable climate change impacts
through enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing
vulnerability to climate change, with a view to building social, economic, and
environmental resilience and an adequate national adaptation response in the
context of the global climate change response;
(c) make a fair contribution to the global effort to stabilise greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that avoids dangerous
anthropogenic interference with the climate system within a timeframe and in
a manner that enables economic, employment, social and environmental
development to proceed in a sustainable manner.
"this Act" includes the Schedule to this Act, and any regulations or notices issued
under this Act.
"vulnerability" means the conditions determined by physical, social, economic and
environmental factors or processes, which increase the susceptibility of a system to
the impact of hazards.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
14 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 20184. (1) This Act applies to the Republic, including-
(a) its internal waters, territorial waters, exclusive economic zone and continental
shelf of the Republic as referred to in sections 3, 4, 7 and 8 of the Maritime
Zones Act, 1994 (Act No.15 of 1994), respectively; and
(b) the Prince Edward Islands referred to in the Prince Edward Islands Act, 1948
3. The interpretation and application of this Act must be guided by the-
(a) national environmental management principles set out in section 2 of the
National Environmental Management Act;
(b) principle that the climate system should be protected for the benefit of present
and future generations of humankind;
(c) principie that acknowledges international equity and each country's common
but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in light of
different national circumstances; and
(d) need to ensure a just transition for all towards an environmentally sustainable
economy and society In the light of national circumstances and developmental
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 156. (1) The Minister must, within two years of the date on which this
section takes effect, by notice in the Gazette, establish a national environmentally
sustainable development framework for achieving the objects of this Act, which must
include -
(a) appropriate mechanisms, systems and procedures to achieve such objects;
(b) mechanisms, systems and procedures to give effect to the Republic's
obligations in terms of international climate change related agreements; and
(c) any other matter which the Minister considers necessary for achieving the
objects of this Act.
(2) The national environmentally sustainable development
framework may assign and delineate responsibilities for the implementation of this
Act amongst -
(a) the different spheres of government; and
(b) different organs of state.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
16 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 20187. Every organ of state must coordinate and harmonise the policies,
plans, programmes and decisions of the national, provincial and local spheres of
government that exercise functions that effect or are affected by climate change or
are entrusted with powers and duties aimed at the achievement, promotion, and
protection of a sustainable environment, in order to-
(b) the consultative process referred to in paragraph (a) need not be complied
with should the national environmentally sustainable development framework
be amended in a non -substantive way.
(4) The national environmentally sustainable development
framework -
(a) may provide for the phasing in of its provisions;
(b) may be amended; and
(c) must be reviewed by the Minister at intervals of not more than five years.
(5) Before publishing the national environmentally sustainable
development framework, or any amendment thereto-
(a) the Minister must follow a consultative process in accordance with sections 16
(3) An organ of state must give effect to the national
environmentally sustainable development framework when exercising a power or
performing a duty in terms of this Act, or any other legislation regulating climate
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 17(5) At least six members, excluding MEC's responsible for the
environment, of the core members referred to in subsection (1) will constitute a
quorum of the Ministerial Committee on Climate Change and decisions will be by
majority vote. In the event of equality of votes, the Minister responsible for planning,
monitoring and evaluation in the Presidency will have a casting vote.
(a)
(6) The Ministerial Committee on Climate Change mustcoordinate efforts across all sector departments and spheres of government
(4) The Minister and the Minister responsible for planning,
monitoring and evaluation in the Presidency are co- chairpersons of the Ministerial
Committee on Climate Change.
8. (1) The Ministerial Committee on Climate Change is hereby
established comprising of the Minister responsible for planning, monitoring and
evaluation in the Presidency, the Minister, the Ministers responsible for the
Functional Areas listed in Schedule, and all MECs responsible for the environment.
(2) Ministers from other relevant departments may be appointed by
(a) ensure that the risks of climate change impacts and associated vulnerabilities
are taken into consideration; and
(b) give effect to the national adaptation and mitigation objectives set out in this
Act.
Institutional arrangements and coordination
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
18 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018(10) The Provincial Committee on Climate Change contemplated in
subsection (9) must be convened within and part of the existing Provincial
intergovernmental forums established in terms of Chapter 2 of the Intergovernmental
Relations Framework Act, 2005 (Act No. 13 of 2005).
The relevant MEC responsible for the environment in a province
is responsible for convening the Provincial Committee on Climate Change and, is the
chairperson of the relevant Provincial Committee on Climate Change.
(12) The relevant Provincial Committee on Climate Change must
develop its own rules concerning its meetings and decision making processes.
(8) The Ministerial Committee on Climate Change may establish an
advisory committee in terms of section 3A of the National Environmental
Management Act, to assist the Committee in the performance of its functions.
(9) A Provincial Committee on Climate Change is hereby
established for each province in the Republic, which must be comprised of all
relevant departments in a province and all Mayors of municipalities located within a
towards a transition to a climate resilient and lower carbon economy and
society in accordance with the White Paper on the National Climate Change
Response and South Africa's Nationally Determined Contribution, and as may
be varied from time to time; and
(b) determine areas requiring regulations in terms of this Act;
(7) The Ministerial Committee on Climate Change may invite
contributions from other relevant departments or stakeholders, to inform the
coordination of efforts towards a transition to a climate resilient and lower carbon
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 19municipality, as the case may be, must -
(a) within one year of the coming into operation of this Act, undertake a climate
change needs and response assessment for the province or municipality, as
the case may be, and such climate change needs and response assessment
must be reviewed at least once every five years; and
(b) within two years of the coming into operation of this Act, develop and
implement a climate change response implementation plan which must be
informed by the climate change needs and response assessment as
(b) recommend any climate change matter to the Ministerial Committee on
Climate Change; and
(c) provide progress reports on climate change response actions in the relevant
province to the Ministerial Committee on Climate Change.
(13) The Provincial Committee on Climate Change must-
(a) coordinate climate change response actions in the relevant province towards
a transition to a climate resilient and lower carbon economy and society in
accordance with the White Paper on National Climate Change Response and
South Africa's Nationally Determined Contribution, as may be varied from time
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
20 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018minimum requirements-
(a) adaptation considerations and options;
(b) an analysis of the nature and characteristics of the province or municipality,
as the case may be, and the particular and unique climate change needs and
(2) A provincial or municipal climate change response
implementation plan, contemplated in subsection (1)(b), must-
(a) include measures or programmes relating to both adaptation and mitigation;
(b) take account of the risks and vulnerabilities associated with climate change;
(c) include mechanisms for their effective implementation that align with national
sector plans;
(d) cover all priority sectors; and
(e) comply with any requirements as may be prescribed by the Minister or MEC.
(3) In relation to mitigation, the climate change needs and response
assessment, contemplated in subsection (1)(a), must be aligned with relevant
national sectoral emission targets, including-
(a) an analysis of the nature and characteristics of the province or municipality,
as the case may be, and the particular and unique climate change needs and
risks that arise as a result of such nature and characteristics; and
(b) the identification and establishment of measures and mechanisms to manage
and implement the required climate change response.
(4) In relation to adaptation, the climate change needs and
response assessment, contemplated in subsection (1)(a), must,address the following
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 21(a) within one year of the coming into operation of this Act, set out national
adaptation objectives which will guide the Republic's adaptation to climate
change impacts, the development of resilience and the Republic's contribution
(5) A provincial or municipal climate change response
implementation plan, contemplated in subsection (1)(b), must be integrated and must
inform provincial or municipal development planning processes and instruments.
(6) The preparation of a climate change response implementation
plan, contemplated in subsection (1)(b), may take into consideration any existing
provincial or municipal plan, which plan may require a review and an amendment to
include climate change responses.
risks that arise as a result of such nature and characteristics; and
(c) identification and mapping, within the sphere of operations of the province or
municipality, as the case may be, of risks, vulnerabilities, areas, ecosystems,
communities and households that will arise or that are vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, and identification and establishment of measures
and mechanisms to manage and implement the required climate change
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
22 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018(a) a reduction in the vulnerability of society, the economy and the environment to
the effects of climate change, strengthening resilience of the socio- economic
and environmental system and enhancing the adaptive capacity of the
national environment and economy to the impacts of climate change;
(b) minimising the risk and vulnerabilities to current and future climate scenarios;
(c) achieving national adaptation objectives;
(d) providing a strategic and policy directive for adaptation to the impacts of
climate change; and
(3) The Minister must, in consultation with the sector departments
and provinces, develop and publish by notice in the Gazette:
(a) a National Adaptation Strategy; and
(b) review the National Adaptation Strategy at least once every five years.
(4) The National Adaptation Strategy will be aimed at achieving the
adaptation objectives; and
(c) determine a date by which the national adaptation objectives should be
incorporated into all relevant national planning instruments, policies, and
programmes which address, or are affected by, the actual and potential
impacts of climate change.
(2) Climate change adaptation within the Republic must be
managed in a coherent and coordinated manner and in accordance with a National
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 23(e) providing an integrated and coordinated approach to managing adaptation
measures to the impacts of climate change by organs of state in all spheres of
government, and where relevant should also include non -governmental
organisations, the private sector and local communities.
(5) The National Adaptation Strategy must include, but not be
limited to, the following minimum components -
(a) an outline of the national adaptation objectives and priorities to inform an
adaptation response in the Republic;
(b) a consideration of the Republic's current and future climate change scenarios
as informed by the adaptation scenarios developed in terms of this Act;
(c) an assessment of the Republic's vulnerability to climate change and related
risks at a sectoral, cross- sectoral, and geographic level, including a
consideration of relevant national disaster risk assessments in terms of the
Disaster Management Act; and
(d) an outline of adaptation options available to reduce identified vulnerabilities by
building adaptive capacity and resilience, in the context of actual or
anticipated social, economic and environmental costs.
(6) The Minister may, in consultation with the sector departments
and provinces, develop adaptation scenarios which anticipate the likely impacts of
climate change in the Republic over the short, medium and longer term.
(7) The adaptation scenarios must include a consideration of-
(a) a systematic observation of the climate system and early warning systems;
(b) the anticipated impacts of climate change on the environment of the Republic
and associated vulnerabilities;
(c) the socio- economic implications of the impacts of climate change within the
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
24 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018The Minister must collate, compile and synthesise information
relevant to the achievement of the national adaptation objectives and the objectives
of this Act, and thereafter publish a Synthesis Adaptation Report for consideration by
Cabinet, and a Synthesis Report on Climate Change Adaptation to be used in the
(9) A Minister responsible for a sector department and any State
Owned Entity for which a sector department is responsible must-
(a) identify and map, within the sphere of operations of the relevant Functional
Area, risks and vulnerabilities, areas, ecosystems, communities and
households that will arise and that are vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change; and identification and establishment of measures and mechanisms to
manage and implement the required response; and
(b) within two years of the coming into operation of this Act, develop and
implement a climate change response implementation plan which must be
informed by the assessments undertaken pursuant to paragraph (a) and be
reviewed and published every five years.
(10) A Minister responsible for a sector department must submit,
every four years of the coming into operation of this Act, reports on the progress
made in relation to the implementation of the climate change response
(8) The adaptation scenarios must inform the development of the
national adaptation objectives, the National Adaptation Strategy and support the
decision making required in terms of this Act.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 25(3) The national greenhouse gas emissions trajectory may be
reviewed.
(4) Before publishing the national greenhouse gas emissions
trajectory, or any amendment thereto, the Minister must follow a consultative process
in accordance with sections 16 and 17.
11. (1) The Minister must, in consultation with the Ministerial Committee
on Climate Change, by notice in the Gazette, determine a national greenhouse gas
emissions trajectory for the Republic of South Africa, which must-
(a) specify a national greenhouse gas emissions reduction objective through
quantitative descriptions of volumes of greenhouse gas emissions expected to
be emitted over a specified period in the Republic;
be informed by relevant and up to date information regarding the total current
and projected volumes of greenhouse gases emitted in the Republic; and
be consistent with the objectives of this Act and the Republic's international
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
26 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018the cost and benefits;
be based on the best available science; and
the best available mitigation options; and
(b) be consistent with the national greenhouse gas emissions trajectory.
(2) The Minister must review the SETs every five years from the
date of initial publication, and when necessary, may amend the SETs.
(3) Before publishing the SETs, or any amendments thereto, the
Minister must follow a consultative process in accordance with sections 16 and 17
(4) The Minister responsible for each sector and sub -sector for
which SETs have been determined in accordance with subsection (1) must prepare
a SERP which provides how the relevant sector and sub -sector will meet the SETs
within five years of the publication of the SETs.
(5) A SERP, contemplated in subsection (4), must be published in
the Gazette by the Minister responsible for each sector and sub -sector for
implementation, and after the publication must be submitted to the Minister within six
months of the publication of the SETs in the Gazette, and must be reviewed and
updated upon every subsequent revision of the SETs as contemplated in subsection
12. (1) The Minister must, in consúltation with the Ministerial Committee
on Climate Change, by notice in the Gazette, every five years, determine SETs for
greenhouse gas emitting sectors and sub -sectors, which must -
(a) address, as a minimum, the following considerationsThis gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 27(10) An MEC responsible for the environment and a Mayor of a
municipality, as the case may be, must support the implementation of the SETs by
preparing and implementing a climate change response implementation plan which
must be aligned with sectoral priorities and targets.
(9) The Minister, in consultation with the Ministers responsible for
each sector and sub -sector for which SETs have been determined in accordance
with subsection (1), must prescribe the minimum requirements for the content of the
(7) The Minister responsible for each sector and sub -sector must
annually report to the Presidency on progress on the implementation of the relevant
SERP and the achievement of the relevant SETs.
(8) The Minister must collate, compile and synthesise SERPs and,
thereafter, submit progress reports on the implementation of the SERPs to Cabinet,
(6) SETs must be included in the government planning cycles and
their implementation must be monitored and reported on by the Presidency, to
ensure that the national climate change response is properly and coherently
implemented across government.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
28 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018(6) The Minister must review and revise a carbon budget allocated
to a person within a reasonable time if the national greenhouse gas inventory
demonstrates an increase in national greenhouse gas emissions above the national
greenhouse gas emissions trajectory.
(7) The Minister must, by notice in the Gazette, require a person to
whom a carbon budget has been allocated to prepare, submit to the Minister for
approval and implement a greenhouse gas mitigation plan which describes the
mitigation actions that such a person will implement to comply with the allocated
carbon budget.
(8) A greenhouse gas mitigation plan must comply with the
requirements, process and procedures as may be prescribed by the Minister.
(9) A person to whom a carbon budget has been allocated is
obliged:
(a) To comply with the carbon budget;
(b) to implement the approved greenhouse gas mitigation plan properly; and
(c) in accordance with the methodology contained in the approved greenhouse
(4) In accordance with the greenhouse gas emissions threshold
contemplated in subsection (1), the Minister must allocate a carbon budget that is
applicable to a specified person for not less than three successive five year periods.
(5) The Minister must review a carbon budget allocated to a person
(3) Before publishing the greenhouse gas emissions threshold, or
any amendment thereto, the Minister must follow a consultative process in
accordance with sections 16 and 17.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 29(12) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, grant an
extension subject to such conditions as the Minister may determine, or refuse to
grant the extension with written reasons.
gas mitigation plan -
(i) monitor its annual greenhouse gas emissions;
(ii) evaluate its progress towards compliance with the carbon budget;
(iii) annually report on the progress towards compliance with the carbon
budget; and
(iv) in the event that such reporting indicates that the person has failed, is
failing or will fail to comply with the carbon budget, to provide an
explanation of measures the person will implement in order to achieve
compliance.
(10) A person contemplated in subsection (4), may, under
extreme circumstances, make an application to the Minister for an
extension of the compliance timeframes with a carbon budget allocated
that person.
(11) An application contemplated in subsection (10) must be
accompanied by the following documents:
(a) a detailed explanation of the reasons for the extension being applied for,
including but not limited to technological, environmental, economic, financial, social
and employment reasons; and
(b) any supporting documents.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
30 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018(4) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, further declare
certain gas emissions as synthetic greenhouse gases on the basis of best available
science and the Republic's international obligations.
(5) Before publishing the notice contemplated in subsection (4), or
any amendment thereto, the Minister must follow a consultative process in
accordance with sections 16 and 17
(b) review and update the plan contemplated in paragraph (a) every five years.
(2) A plan developed in accordance with subsection (1)(a), must
address the following minimum considerations -
(a) how importers and exporters of synthetic greenhouse gases must account for
their emissions of synthetic greenhouse gases;
(b) measures that facilitate the phase out of synthetic greenhouse gases;
(c) setting and prescribing thresholds for the use of synthetic greenhouse gases;
and
(d) timeframes for phasing out synthetic greenhouse gases.
(3) The Minister may prescribe a carbon budget applicable to
14. (1) The Minister, in consultation with the Minister responsible for
energy, the Minister responsible for trade and industry and any affected party,
must-
(a) develop a plan to phase down or phase out the use of synthetic greenhouse
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 31(b) that will promote effective monitoring, evaluation and assessment of national
progress in relation to climate change adaptation matters, including -
(i) in relation to the progress made by Departments responsible for
Functional Areas, Provinces and Municipalities with the development
(i) in relation to any matter necessary to give effect to the Republic's
obligations in terms of an international agreement relating to climate
change; and
(ii) in relation to the management of emissions of greenhouse gases
including-
(ea) the determination, review, amendment and cancellation of a
carbon budget allocation and all matters related thereto;
(bb) the phasing down or phasing out of synthetic greenhouse gases,
including the development of timeframes, inventories and
mechanisms for reporting; and
(cc) incentives and disincentives to encourage a change in
behaviour towards the generation of greenhouse gases amongst
all sectors of society;
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
32 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018and implementation of climate change needs and response
assessments and climate change response implementation plans;
(ii) in relation to the performance of Departments responsible for
Functional Areas, Provinces and Municipalities in respect of the
national adaptation objectives and related target indicators, including
the extent of any deviation in such progress; and
(iii) in relation to the consequences for the failure of sector departments
responsible for Functional Areas, Provinces and Municipalities to report
in the prescribed manner; and
(c) that will promote the effective monitoring, evaluation and assessment of
national progress in relation to climate change matters, including in relation to
climate change data and information, including -
(i) information relating to direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions,
including for the purposes of planning, analysis and monitoring; and to
inform how the Republic may comply with any international obligations;
(ii) information necessary to determine climate change vulnerability and to
foster resilience; and
(iii) any matter that may or must be prescribed in terms of this Act.
(2) A regulation made In terms of this Act may provide that any
person who contravenes or fails to comply with a provision thereof is guilty of an
offence and liable in the case of a first conviction to a fine not exceeding R5 million,
or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years and in the case of a second
or subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding R10 million or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 10 years, and in both instances to both such fine and such
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 33(c) allow public participation in the process.
(3) When conducting the consultations contemplated in subsection
(1), the MEC must -
(a) consult all members of the Executive Council whose areas of responsibility
will be affected by the exercise of the power;
(b) in accordance with the principles of cooperative governance as set out in
16. (1) Before exercising a power in terms this Act, the Minister or MEC
must follow such consultative processes as may be appropriate in the
circumstances.
(2) When conducting the consultations contemplated in subsection
(1), the Minister must-
(a) consult all Cabinet members whose areas of responsibility will be affected by
the exercise of the power;
(b) in accordance with the principles of cooperative governance as set out in
Chapter 3 of the Constitution, consult the MEC responsible for the
environment in each province that will be affected by the exercise of the
(3) (a) Before publishing any regulation made in terms of this
Act, or any amendment to such regulation, the Minister must follow a consultative
process in accordance with sections 16 and 17.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
34 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018(a) invite members of the public to submit to the Minister or MEC, within 30 days
of publication of the notice in the Gazette, written representations on or
objections to the proposed exercise of the power; and
(b) contain sufficient information to enable members of the public to submit
meaningful representations or objections.
(3) The Minister or MEC may in appropriate circumstances allow
any interested person or community to present oral representations or objections to
the Minister or MEC, or a person designated by the Minister or MEC.
(4) The Minister or MEC must give due consideration to all
representations or objections received or presented before exercising the power
17. (1) Before exercising a power which, in terms of this Act, must be
exercised in accordance with this section, the Minister or MEC must give notice of
the proposed exercise of the relevant power-
(a) in the Gazette; and
(b) in at least one newspaper distributed nationally or, if the exercise of the power
will affect only a specific area, in at least one newspaper distributed in that
Chapter 3 of the Constitution, consult the Minister and all other national
organs of state that will be affected by the exercise of the power; and
(c) allow public participation in the process.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 35(4) The Minister may confirm, vary or revoke any decision taken in
consequence of a delegation or sub -delegation In terms of this section, subject to
any rights that may have accrued to a person as a result of the decision.
18. (1) The Minister may delegate to an official in the Department any
power or duty conferred on the Minister, by or under this Act except-
(a) the power to publish or amend a notice in terms of section 15 or publish or
amend a regulation in terms of section 15; or
(b) the duty imposed on the Minister by section 8.
(2) A delegation referred to in subsection (1) -
(a) must be in writing;
(b) may be made subject to conditions;
(c) does not prevent the exercise of the power or the performance of the duty by
the Minister himself or herself;
(d) may include the power to sub -delegate; and
(e) may be withdrawn by the Minister.
(3) The Minister must give notice in the Gazette of any delegation of
a power or duty to an MEC.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
36 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 201820. (1) Any person may appeal to the Minister against a decision taken
by any person acting under a power delegated by the Minister under this Act.
(2) An appeal lodged in terms of subsection (1) of this Act must be
noted and must be dealt with in terms of section 43 of the National Environmental
Management Act and any regulation developed in terms section 44 of the National
Environmental Management Act.
(a) the severity of the offence in terms of its impact on health or well -being of the
citizens of the country and the environment; and
(b) the monetary or other benefits that accrued to the convicted person through
the commission of the offence.
(2) A person convicted of an offence in terms of subsection (1) is
liable, in the case of a first conviction, to a fine not exceeding R5 million or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years, or to both such fine and such
imprisonment, and in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, to a fine not
exceeding R10 million or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 years, or to
both such fine and such imprisonment.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 3721. The regulations and notice relating to the Declaration of Greenhouse
Gases as Priority Air Pollutants, the National Pollution Prevention Plans Regulations
and the National Greenhouse Gas Emission Reporting Regulations published in
terms of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No. 39
of 2004) which exist when this Act takes effect, remain in force and effect until they
are amended, replaced or repealed in terms of this Act.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
38 No. 41689 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 8 JUNE 2018Functional Areas
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries;
Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs;
Economic Development;
Energy;
Health;
Human Settlements;
Mineral Resources;
National Treasury;
Public Enterprises;
Public Works;
Rural Development and Land Reform;
Science and Technology;
Trade and Industry;
Transport; and
Water and Sanitation.
This gazette is also available free online at www.gpwonline.co.za
STAATSKOERANT, 8 JUNIE 2018 No. 41689 3