1 
THE NEW GROWTH PATH: THE FRAMEWORK 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In his inaugural State of the Nation Address in June 2009, President Jacob Zuma stated: 
“It is my pleasure and honour to highlight the key elements of our programme of 
action. The creation of decent work will be at the centre of our economic policies 
and will influence our investment attraction and job creation initiatives. In line with 
our undertakings, we have to forge ahead to promote a more inclusive economy.” 
There is growing consensus that creating decent work, reducing inequality and defeating 
poverty can only happen through a new growth path founded on a restructuring of the 
South African economy to improve its performance in terms of labour absorption as well 
as the composition and rate of growth. To achieve that step change in growth and 
transformation of economic conditions requires hard choices and a shared 
determination as South Africans to see it through. The Government is committed to 
forging such a consensus and leading the way by 
1. Identifying areas where employment creation is possible on a large scale as a result 
of substantial changes in conditions in South Africa and globally. 
2. Developing a policy package to facilitate employment creation in these areas, above 
all through: 
a. A comprehensive drive to enhance both social equity and competitiveness; 
b. Systemic changes to mobilise domestic investment around activities that can 
create sustainable employment; and 
c. Strong social dialogue to focus all stakeholders on encouraging growth in 
employment-creating activities. 
The New Growth Path must provide bold, imaginative and effective strategies to create 
the millions of new jobs South Africa needs. It must also lay out a dynamic vision for 
how we can collectively achieve a more developed, democratic, cohesive and equitable 
economy and society over the medium term, in the context of sustained growth. The 
strategy sets out critical markers for employment creation and growth and identifies 
where viable changes in the structure and character of production can generate a more 
inclusive and greener economy over the medium to long run. To that end, it combines 
macroeconomic and microeconomic interventions. 
The shift to a new growth path will require the creative and collective efforts of all 
sections of South African society. It will require leadership and strong governance. It 
takes account of the new opportunities that are available to us, the strengths we have 
and the constraints we face. We will have to develop a collective national will and 
embark on joint action to change the character of the South African economy and 2 
ensure that the benefits are shared more equitably by all our people, particularly the 
poor. 
Achieving the New Growth Path requires that we address key tradeoffs. Amongst other 
decisions, government must prioritise its own efforts and resources more rigorously to 
support employment creation and equity; business must take on the challenge of 
investing in new areas; and business and labour together must work with government to 
address inefficiencies and constraints across the economy and partner to create new 
decent work opportunities. 
Some key tradeoffs include: 
• Between present consumption and future growth, since that requires higher 
investment and saving in the present; 
• Between the needs of different industries for infrastructure, skills and other 
interventions; 
• Between policies that promise high benefits but also entail substantial risks, and 
policies that are less transformative and dynamic but are also less likely to have 
unintended consequences; 
• Between a competitive currency that supports growth in production, employment 
and exports and a stronger rand that makes imports of capital and consumer goods 
cheaper; and 
• Between the present costs and future benefits of a green economy. 
The Economic Cluster commenced work on the New Growth Path in the second half of 
last year. It tasked the Economic Development Department (EDD) with preparing a 
framework, which the department presented to the Ministers in November 2009. The 
EDD tabled a further summary at the January 2010 Cabinet Lekgotla. Following this, it 
has expanded on the framework through consultations with the main economic 
ministries and provincial departments of economic development as well as other 
stakeholders. The document knits together the Industrial Policy Acton Plan (IPAP) 2 as 
well as policies and programmes in rural development, agriculture, science and 
technology, education and skills development, labour, mining and beneficiation, 
tourism, social development and other areas. 
This document summarises the work so far. More detailed work is being prepared in 
each area discussed in this summary. 
2 THE CONTEXT
This section first reviews the extent of joblessness and inequality, which makes 
employment creation our top priority. It then outlines changes in global and national 
conditions that generate new challenges but also immense opportunities for
overcoming the legacy of inequality and exclusion that still shapes our economy. 3 
2.1 THE CORE CHALLENGE: MASS JOBLESSNESS, POVERTY AND INEQUALITY
For most of the ‘00s, South Africa enjoyed relatively strong economic growth. As a 
result, despite the volatility of the 1990s, overall economic expansion between 1994 
and 2008 approached 4%, more or less the same as other upper-middle income 
countries. In contrast, from the late 1970s to the early 1990s, South Africa’s economic 
growth lagged its peers, running at just over 1% a year. 
Despite improved growth, the economy remained one of the most inequitable in the 
world. In the mid-‘00s, some 40% of the national income went to the richest 10% of 
households. Deep inequalities were associated with extraordinarily high levels of 
joblessness. In the late ‘00s, less than half of all working-age South Africans had incomeearning employment, compared to an international norm of almost two thirds. 
Inequalities and joblessness were also associated with the legacy of apartheid
geography. In the mid-‘00s, around a third of the population lived in the former 
Bantustans. Fewer than one in three adults there was employed. Over half of all 
households in the former Bantustans depended mostly on remittances or grants, 
compared to under a quarter in the rest of the country. 
The position was worst for young people, largely because too few jobs were created to 
absorb the large numbers of new entrants to the labour market. In the first quarter of 
2010, the unemployment rate for young people aged 16 to 30 was 40%, compared to 
16% for those aged 30 to 65. 
Amongst the employed, many workers had poorly paid, insecure and dead-end jobs. In 
the third quarter of 2008, half of all employed people earned less than R2500 a month 
and over a third earned under R1000 a month, according to Statistics South Africa. The 
informal sector, agriculture and domestic work contributed a third of all employment, 
but two thirds of working people earning under R1000 a month. Moreover, one in five 
employed African women was a domestic worker. The share of wages in the national 
income dropped from 50% in 1994 to just over 45% in 2009, while the share of profits 
climbed from 40% to 45%. 
In short, the economy has not created sufficient employment opportunities for many of 
our people over the past three decades. Creating more and better jobs must lie at the 
heart of any strategy to fight poverty, reduce inequalities and address rural 
underdevelopment. 
The ILO defines the decent work agenda in terms of four strategic objectives: 
• Employment and income opportunities, 
• Fundamental principles and rights at work and international labour standards 
(essentially organisational rights and freedom from coercion and discrimination), 
• Social protection (which includes decent working conditions) and social security, and 
• Social dialogue and tripartism. 4 
2.2 THE CHANGING GLOBAL AND NATIONAL CONTEXT
At the global level, the New Growth Path responds to the severe economic downturn 
from late 2008 as well as accelerating technological change. Nationally, it results from 
the insufficient job growth of the ‘00s and the need to accelerate employment creation, 
income growth and a decline in poverty. 
The global economic crisis means that South Africa must re-think historical patterns of 
trade and investment. In the past two years, slow growth in our traditional partners in 
the global North has been offset by the rapid recovery of growth in China, India and 
Brazil. Africa’s importance has also grown in recent years, as a source of resources and a 
potential market with one billion consumers as well as one of the fastest-growing 
regions in the world. Shared development across our region is a pre-condition for 
sustainable prosperity in South Africa. 
Global economic turmoil has also opened up new policy space for developing economies 
to go beyond conventional policy prescriptions. Our strategic objective must be to forge 
a consensus on the new opportunities within South Africa, across the continent and 
globally, and how these can be seized to achieve socially desirable and sustainable 
outcomes. The government has a critically important role to play in accelerating social 
and economic development including through effective regulation of markets. 
The world economy faces far-reaching changes as a result of efforts to reduce global 
warming. While efforts to control emissions will impose heavy costs – especially on 
relatively carbon-intensive economies like South Africa – they also lay the basis for 
major new industries. More broadly, accelerating technological change promises to 
transform the world economy in the coming years, with new job opportunities in areas 
such as biotechnology and nano-technology. 
The New Growth Path also responds to domestic developments. 
The transition to democracy emerged when the economy was already undergoing 
considerable structural change. Reintegration with the world economy as well as 
changes in mining and agriculture saw extensive job shedding. In the late 1970s, around 
two thirds of all working-age South Africans were employed – just on the international 
norm. By the early 1990s, in contrast, fewer than half had employment. Despite 
substantial improvements in employment creation from 1994, in 2010 South Africa still 
ranked amongst the ten countries with the lowest level of employment in the world. 
The upswing from the early ‘00s to 2008 built on South Africa’s traditional strengths, as 
booming international commodity prices combined with high global liquidity to foster 
significant short-term inflows of capital. One consequence was that this enabled the 
country to spend more than it earned; another was that it increased the nominal value 
of the rand. It also resulted in what has been described as consumption-led growth that 
was not underpinned by a strong production base, with rapid growth in retail, the 
financial sector and telecommunications and comparatively slow expansion in 
manufacturing, agriculture and mining. 5 
While the ‘00s saw relatively rapid employment creation, many jobs were poorly paid 
and insecure. Most new jobs emerged in retail, security and other low-level business 
services, and housing construction. Finance and telecommunications did not create 
much employment, despite their rapid growth, and mining and agriculture shed 
workers. Security guards alone accounted for one in 14 new jobs created between 2002 
and 2008, with 150 000 new security guards employed in this period. 
The strong rand permitted reductions in the interest rate, contributing to rapid credit 
creation, as well as cheaper imports, but it also contributed to lower profitability and 
competitiveness in manufacturing, agriculture and other tradable-goods sectors. It 
generated a consumption boom that was largely restricted to South Africans in the 
upper income group. Deep inequalities in incomes and wealth meant that working 
people saw only limited improvements, as the richest 10% of households captured 
around 40% of the national income and around three quarters of new credit creation. 
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
wages for lower paid workers fell in the ‘00s. 
The global economic downturn ended this pattern of growth abruptly with a 3% fall in 
the GDP from the third quarter of 2008 to mid-2009. Job losses were still more severe, 
as employment dropped by a million jobs from the end of 2008 to the middle of 2010. 
As a result, the employment ratio fell back from a high of 45% in 2008 to 41% in 2010 – 
virtually the same level as in 2002, before the economic boom started. 
In addition to high unemployment, the growth phase in the ‘00s pointed to fundamental 
bottlenecks and imbalances in the economy, especially: 
• Dependence on the minerals value chain, including smelting and refining, which 
used huge amounts of electricity, leading to high emissions intensity. 
• Weaknesses in the state’s use of commodity-based revenue for economic 
diversification and skills development. 
• A persistent balance-of-trade deficit funded with short-term capital inflows 
(essentially foreign investment in equities and in 2009/10 increasingly in interestbearing assets), attracted largely by interest rates that were high by international 
standards. In effect, the country borrowed abroad to sustain government spending, 
investment and household consumption which remained heavily biased toward the 
well off. Both investment and domestic savings remained below the levels required 
for sustained growth. 
• Bottlenecks and backlogs in logistics, energy infrastructure and skills, which raised 
costs across the economy. A particular concern arose from energy shortages that 
resulted in part from weak investment in new generation capacity as well as high 
demand spurred by low prices for much of the ‘00s. 
• Continued economic concentration in key sectors, permitting rent-seeking at the 
expense of consumers and industrial development. 6 
The New Growth Path responds to emerging opportunities and risks while building on 
policies advanced since the achievement of democracy 16 years ago. The 
Reconstruction and Development Programme advocated greater equity as the basis for 
long-term development and growth. In the mid-‘00s, AsgiSA renewed government’s 
commitment to addressing joblessness and poverty and identified infrastructure needs, 
skills shortages and unnecessary regulatory burdens as core constraints on growth. In 
addition, in the face of the global crisis in 2008/9, government, organised business, 
labour and community groups forged a response to minimise the impact on the 
economy and on working people. That constructive and collaborative approach to 
meeting the challenges facing South Africa informs our strategies going forward. 
3 THE NEW GROWTH PATH
The New Growth Path starts by identifying where employment creation is possible, both 
within economic sectors as conventionally defined and in cross-cutting activities. It then 
analyses the policies and institutional developments required to take advantage of 
these opportunities. 
In essence, the aim is to target our limited capital and capacity at activities that 
maximise the creation of decent work opportunities. To that end, we must use both 
macro and micro economic policies to create a favourable overall environment and to 
support more labour-absorbing activities. The main indicators of success will be jobs 
(the number and quality of jobs created), growth (the rate, labour intensity and 
composition of economic growth), equity (lower income inequality and poverty) and 
environmental outcomes. 
To achieve profound changes in the structure of savings, investment and production, 
the government must steadily and consistently pursue key policies and programmes 
over at least a decade. Moreover, the state must coordinate its efforts around core 
priorities rather than dispersing them across numerous efforts, however worthwhile, 
that do not contribute to a sustained expansion in economic opportunities for our 
people. These are the core characteristics of a developmental state. 
The requisite policy stability and coherence will be supported by effective social 
dialogue that helps establish a broad consensus on long-run policy goals and a vision for 
the country, and facilitates the necessary tradeoffs and sacrifices by ensuring a visibly 
fair distribution of the benefits from growth. Engagement with stakeholder 
representatives on policy, planning and implementation at national, sectoral and local 
levels is central to achieving coherent and effective strategies that are realised without 
endless debates and delays. That, in turn, means government must both strengthen its 
own capacity for engagement and leadership, and re-design delivery systems to include 
stakeholders meaningfully. 
Long-term structural change also requires phasing to establish the preconditions for 
success over time. In the case of employment, for instance, the steps that the state can 
take vary over time: 7 
1. In the very short run, the state can accelerate employment creation primarily 
through direct employment schemes, targeted subsidies and/or a more 
expansionary macroeconomic package. 
2. Over the short to medium term, it can support labour-absorbing activities, especially 
in the agricultural value chain, light manufacturing and services, to generate largescale employment. Government can provide effective inducements to private
investment in targeted sectors principally by prioritising labour-absorbing activities 
for the provision of appropriate and cost-effective infrastructure, regulatory 
interventions that effectively address market and state failures, measures to 
improve skills systems, and in some cases subsidies to production and innovation. 
3. In the longer run, as full employment is achieved, the state must increasingly 
support knowledge- and capital-intensive sectors in order to remain competitive. 
This inherent phasing means that in the medium term the state must focus on 
facilitating growth in sectors able to create employment on a large scale. But it should 
not neglect more advanced industries that are crucial for sustained long-run growth. 
Government must encourage stronger investment by the private and public sectors to 
grow employment-creating activities rapidly while maintaining and incrementally 
improving South Africa’s core strengths in sectors such as capital equipment for 
construction and mining, metallurgy, heavy chemicals, pharmaceuticals, software, green 
technologies and biotechnology. These industries build on our strong resource base and 
our advanced skills and capacity in some economic sectors. 
South Africa needs to re-industrialise off the back of the opportunities identified in the 
growth path. But this is more than simply identifying sectors and product niches. It also 
requires markets. In this context, South African businesses need to do more to find 
opportunities in the fast-growing economies of China, India and Brazil. This requires 
more active pursuit of exports to, and investment from, these emerging centres of 
economic power. 
This strategy comes with challenges, for example in the composition of the trade 
relationship. While trade with China has grown significantly, South Africa still largely 
exports raw materials and imports value-added manufactured products. The 
Comprehensive Strategic Partnership signed in August 2010 between the two countries 
commits to “improve, through a concerted effort, the current structure of trade 
between the two countries, in particular by working towards a more balanced trade 
profile and encouraging trade in manufactured value-added products…China, in this 
spirit, will encourage its enterprises to increase investment in South Africa’s 
manufacturing industry to promote the creation of value adding activities in close 
proximity to the source of raw materials.” South Africa must develop practical proposals 
to take advantage of this joint commitment. 
The growth path emphasises supply-side needs. A critical requirement, however, is 
simultaneously to improve demand. In all successful economies, the domestic and 
regional market has been a critical factor in long-term growth. This points to the 8 
importance of production aimed at meeting basic needs within the national economy. In 
South Africa, however, the domestic market is relatively narrow due to the relatively 
small population, low employment levels and deep inequalities. The growth path 
therefore proposes strategies: 
• To deepen the domestic and regional market by growing employment, increasing 
incomes and undertaking other measures to improve equity and income 
distribution, and 
• To widen the market for South African goods and services through a stronger focus 
on exports to the region and other rapidly growing economies. 
The measures in the New Growth Path, taken together, constitute a key means to 
address the income inequalities in our society. They place decent work (more and better 
jobs) at the centre of the fight against inequality but also include measures such as skills 
enhancement, small enterprise development, wage and productivity gain-sharing 
policies, addressing the excessive pay gap between top and bottom, progressive 
taxation and support for the social wage, meaning public services targeted primarily at 
low-income households. 
The connection between economic and social measures needs to be further 
strengthened. In addition to their important social goals, basic and secondary education 
play a critical role in long-run equality, access to employment and competitiveness. So 
does investment in health, including effective measures to address HIV/AIDS. 
Government has prioritised health and education investment and delivery. While the 
detailed measures are not spelt out in the New Growth Path, these services are critical 
success factors for this employment-rich strategy. 
The next section reviews opportunities for employment creation – the “jobs drivers.” 
The following section outlines core cross-cutting policy proposals, followed by a brief 
review of resourcing opportunities. After a brief discussion of institutional and spatial 
requirements, the final section sets out actions to finalise work on the growth path and 
begin implementation. 
3.1 JOBS DRIVERS
If we can grow employment by five million jobs by 2020 (around three million more 
than the anticipated growth if we extrapolated from 2002 to 2009), over half of all 
working-age South Africans would have paid employment and narrow unemployment 
would drop by 10 percentage points from 25% currently to around 15%. 
Achieving this goal will be the key target that informs the annual employment and 
growth targets that will be set. We can reach this target if we focus consistently on 
areas that have the potential for creating employment on a large scale – what we term 
“jobs drivers” - and securing strong and sustainable growth in the next decade. Most of 
the projected new jobs will come from the private sector. 9 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Rate of growth of GDP required to create 500 000 
employment opportunities a year
Employment intensity of growth (rate of growth in 
employment relative to rate of growth of GDP)
Two key variables will affect the target of five million new jobs: the rate of economic 
growth and the employment intensity of that growth – that is, the rate of growth in 
employment relative to the rate of growth in GDP. In effect, we need both to maximise 
growth and to ensure that it generates more employment, mostly in the private sector, 
in order to reach our target. The employment intensity of growth must be kept between 
0,5 and 0,8, while the rate of growth in GDP should rise to between 4% and 7% a year. 
The following box explains this relationship. Supporting the jobs drivers through 
appropriate measures is important to encourage more employment-intensive growth. 
Employment intensity and growth 
The rate of growth required to 
achieve the target of five million 
jobs over the next ten years 
depends on the employment 
intensity of growth – that is, the 
relationship between the growth 
in employment and the growth 
in the GDP. The actual 
employment intensity of growth 
in South Africa is the subject of 
debate both because of 
difficulties with the data, 
especially before 2001, and 
because of annual fluctuations. 
As a result, the period chosen 
largely determines what is seen 
as South Africa’s employment 
intensity of growth. In the event, 
the employment intensity of 
growth was 0.8 from 1996 
(Census data) to the second 
quarter of 2010 (QLFS data); 0.5 
from 2001 (LFS data) to the 
second quarter of 2010 (QLFS 
data); and 0.67 from 2002 (LFS 
data) to the second quarter of 
2009 (QLFS data). 
The jobs drivers we have identified are: 
1. Substantial public investment in infrastructure both to create employment directly, 
in construction, operation and maintenance as well as the production of inputs, and 
indirectly by improving efficiency across the economy. 
2. Targeting more labour-absorbing activities across the main economic sectors – the 
agricultural and mining value chains, manufacturing and services. 
3. Taking advantage of new opportunities in the knowledge and green economies. 10 
4. Leveraging social capital in the social economy and the public services. 
5. Fostering rural development and regional integration. 
In each of these areas, we will have to make a special effort to generate opportunities 
for young people, who face the highest unemployment rate. 
The categories of the jobs drivers are not set in concrete – new opportunities may 
emerge that are not foreseen, assumptions on which existing opportunities are based 
may change - nor are they fully independent of each other. For instance, the green 
economy requires profound changes in energy infrastructure, while rural development 
depends in large part on infrastructure, agriculture and tourism. The aim is not to focus 
on categorisation, but rather to use the mapping process to think innovatively about 
new opportunities for employment creation. A critical element of the New Growth Path 
is to ensure that the drivers leverage and reinforce each other based on their interlinkages. 
As a first step, we will prioritise efforts to support employment creation in the following 
key sectors: 
• infrastructure 
• the agricultural value chain 
• the mining value chain 
• the green economy 
• manufacturing sectors, which are included in IPAP2, and 
• tourism and certain high-level services. 
These opportunities will take advantage of the potential of new approaches in the other 
jobs drivers, notably regional integration in Africa and the knowledge and social 
economies. 
In many areas of the jobs drivers, departments have already initiated strategies to 
support employment creation; in others, they are currently reviewing their policies and 
programmes. The New Growth Path builds on existing work, although limited space 
means this is not always spelt out in detail. 
For each of the jobs drivers, we have set a target for employment creation. These 
targets are achievable if we can ensure a supportive environment as well as
implementing specific support measures. 
Jobs Driver 1: Infrastructure. Public investment can create 250 000 jobs a year in 
energy, transport, water and communications infrastructure and in housing, through to 
2015. The jobs are in four activities: construction of new infrastructure; operation of the 
new facilities; expanded maintenance; and the manufacture of components for the 
infrastructure programme. In addition to these four activities, the impact of the massive 11 
infrastructure programme on job creation across the economy (the “multiplier effect”) 
will be substantial. 
In the construction process, most of the employment will arise in housing and public 
works, while the manufacture of inputs provides both employment opportunities and 
scope to enhance industrial capacity. The provision of infrastructure also serves to 
enhance efficiency across the economy, laying the basis for stepped-up growth and 
employment creation in every industry and at the same time it can also significantly 
advance social equity goals and address inequalities in the society. It is critical for 
increasing opportunities in the former Bantustans, which still suffer the greatest 
backlogs in household services, transport and communications. In this context, 
addressing the energy and logistics challenges will prove essential for both overall 
competitiveness and for overcoming the spatial patterns of apartheid. 
The second Integrated Resource Plan for electricity (IRP2) foresees a near-doubling of 
electricity capacity by 2030, with 33% of new generation coming from renewable 
sources and 25% from nuclear power. It is also a key part of the plan to improve 
economic efficiency and to reduce emissions. 
Greater emphasis will also be placed on the expansion of rail transport, with more 
railway tracks and rolling stock, given the cost and logistics advantages for both 
commuters and freight transport. In a water-constrained country, the investment in 
water infrastructure is an essential step in the strategy to expand agriculture and agroprocessing. Communications provides the backbone for a modern economy, and 
expanding the infrastructure will go together with measures to reduce costs. 
The crucial steps to achieve our targets for infrastructure are to maintain high levels of 
public investment with a sustainable step change in investment by general government 
and public sector corporations, backed by investment in skills development and 
measures to prevent non-competitive pricing by contractors; to strengthen local 
procurement of inputs in order to maximise the multiplier effect, including through the 
development of new industries to provide for renewable energy; to use labour-based 
production methods where appropriate; and to target infrastructure provision to 
support broad-based growth and rising competitiveness linked to a coherent and 
sustainable strategy on rural development. 
Jobs Driver 2: Main economic sectors. The New Growth Path targets opportunities for 
300 000 households in agricultural smallholder schemes plus 145 000 jobs in 
agroprocessing by 2020, while there is potential to upgrade conditions for 660 000 farmworkers. Initial projections by the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) suggest that 
mining can add 140 000 additional jobs by 2020, and 200 000 by 2030, not counting the 
downstream and sidestream effects. Much of manufacturing is included under other 
jobs drivers, but IPAP2 targets 350 000 jobs by 2020 in the industries not covered 
elsewhere. High level services can create over 250 000 jobs directly just in tourism and 
business services, with many more possible in the cultural industries. 12 
The New Growth Path sets out a range of practical measures at sectoral level to achieve 
these employment targets, with the following core strategies: 
• Restructuring land reform to support smallholder schemes with comprehensive 
support around infrastructure, marketing, finance, extension services, etc.; 
upgrading employment in commercial agriculture especially through improved 
worker voice; measures to support growth in commercial farming and to help 
address price fluctuations in maize and wheat while supporting national food 
security; acceleration of land claims processes and better support to new farmers 
following land-claims settlements; programmes to ensure competitive pricing of 
inputs, especially fertiliser; and support for fishing and aquaculture. 
• Accelerating exploitation of mineral reserves by ensuring an effective review of the 
minerals rights regime, lowering the cost of critical inputs including logistics and 
skills in order to stimulate private investment in the mining sector, and setting up a 
state-owned mining company that would co-exist with a strong private mining 
sector and that promotes beneficiation, as well as greater utilisation of the mineral 
resource base of the country for developmental purposes, including potentially 
through a sovereign wealth fund. 
• Refocusing the beneficiation strategy to support fabrication (stage 4) (rather than 
only smelting and refining, which are both capital and energy intensive), including 
stronger measures to address uncompetitive pricing of intermediate inputs, such as 
where appropriate, export taxes on selected mineral products linked to clear 
industrial strategies. 
• Phasing support for manufacturing to encourage activities that can generate 
employment on a large scale and meet basic needs at lower cost in the short to 
medium term, while sustaining development of more knowledge-intensive 
industries for long-run growth. A number of the required actions have been set out 
in IPAP2. 
• In tourism, strengthening measures to expand the tourism infrastructure and 
services, promote targeted marketing campaigns, manage costs, quality assurance 
and logistics, improve training and identify employment and entrepreneurial
opportunities for the youth; in business services such as finance and 
communications, enhancing support measures to encourage diversification; and 
developing a comprehensive programme to support cultural industries. In addition, 
the conditions of vulnerable workers in the services will be addressed. 
Jobs Driver 3: Seizing the potential of new economies. Technological innovation opens 
the opportunity for substantial employment creation. The New Growth Path targets 300 
000 additional direct jobs by 2020 to green the economy, with 80 000 in manufacturing 
and the rest in construction, operations and maintenance of new environmentally 
friendly infrastructure. The potential for job creation rises to well over 400 000 by 2030. 
Additional jobs will be created by expanding the existing public employment schemes to 
protect the environment, as well as in production of biofuels. The IRP2 targets for 13 
renewable energy open up major new opportunities for investment and employment in 
manufacturing new energy technologies as well as in construction. 
In addition, the New Growth Path targets 100 000 new jobs by 2020 in the knowledgeintensive sectors of ICT, higher education, healthcare, mining-related technologies, 
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology. 
The lessons from international experience point to the importance of emulation, 
adaptation and diffusion of existing technologies in ways that will support large-scale 
employment creation and improved livelihoods. 
The main strategies to achieve these targets are: 
• Comprehensive support for energy efficiency and renewable energy as required by 
the IRP2, including appropriate pricing policies, combined with programmes to 
encourage the local production of inputs, starting with solar water heaters; 
• Public employment and recycling schemes geared to greening the economy; 
• Stronger programmes, institutions and systems to diffuse new technologies to SMEs 
and households; 
• Greater support for R&D and tertiary education linked to growth potential and 
developing South Africa as the higher education hub for the continent; and 
• Continuing to reduce the cost of and improve access to broadband. 
Jobs Driver 4: Investing in social capital and public services. The social economy 
includes myriad not-for-profit institutions that provide goods and services, including coops, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and stokvels. If the sector grew in South 
Africa closer to international norms, we can anticipate 260 000 new employment 
opportunities. The public service can also generate 100 000 jobs in health, education 
and policing by 2020 even if it grows by only 1% a year, as well as substantial 
opportunities through public employment schemes. Significant steps are being taken to 
address the challenge of HIV/AIDS and these will impact on the size and shape of the 
public health infrastructure as well as improve the welfare and productivity of the 
workforce. 
Achieving these targets requires comprehensive government support for socialeconomy initiatives, including assistance with marketing, bookkeeping, technological 
and financial services and training, based in part on a stronger co-op support agency and 
possibly a training academy; the development of linkages within the social economy to 
encourage learning and mutual support; work with union and community investment 
companies to develop a Charter with commitments to job creation; and increasing state 
procurement from and service delivery through organisations in the social economy. 
In addition, government will set targets for growth in the public service to meet national 
needs. It will also establish rural, literacy, green and HIV-education youth brigades that 
engage up to a million young people over the next few years, combined with measures 
to expose young people to work experience through internships in the private and 14 
public sectors. It will also extend the Community Works Programme to more wards. 
Expansion of public employment will require proper budgeting and a strategy to ensure 
both affordability and cost effectiveness. Government is committed to developing a 
multi-pronged strategy to support youth employment in particular. 
Jobs Driver 5: Spatial development. While urbanisation will continue, a significant share 
of the population will remain in rural areas, engaged in the rural economy. Government 
will step up its efforts to provide public infrastructure and housing in rural areas, both to 
lower the costs of economic activity and to foster sustainable communities. Rural 
development programmes can achieve a measurable improvement in livelihoods for 500 
000 households, as well as stimulating employment in other sectors. 
Enhancing rural employment requires finalisation of a spatial perspective that sets out 
the opportunities available and the choices that we must make in order to lay the basis 
for aligning government spending, infrastructure and housing investment and economic 
development initiatives. In addition, government must do more to support small-scale 
agriculture, including through community food gardens and marketing and service coops as well as accessible banking facilities. 
Regional development is an imperative for both solidarity and sustainable growth. In 
terms of employment in South Africa, increased exports to SADC alone can generate 
almost 60 000 additional direct jobs by 2015 and around 150 000 by 2020, with 
additional employment growth arising from South Africa’s position as a financial, 
logistics and services hub and from collaboration around regional infrastructure and 
investment. These opportunities in turn can strengthen economic development in 
neighbouring countries. 
South Africa cannot succeed with regional development without strong partnerships 
with other countries on the continent. Our proposals centre on a strategy for improving 
logistics, with clear priorities and timeframes, including a “smart ports” network that 
integrates a common systems, people and technology platform across a number of 
countries to improve port efficiencies and costs (to be explored initially on a pilot basis 
with five key ports on the continent) and an integrated road and rail system across the 
continent; measures to expand regional investment and trade and develop integrated 
supply-chains and industrial corridors particularly in mining and agro-processing; and 
reducing regulatory obstacles to trade and travel. 
3.2 A DEVELOPMENT POLICY PACKAGE FOR GROWTH, DECENT WORK AND EQUITY
The work done for the New Growth Path indicates that our goal of growing employment 
by five million new jobs over the coming decade is achievable. It cannot, however, be 
achieved with only a single policy instrument. It needs a package of interventions that 
addresses a range of challenges in the economy and that balances competing policy 
concerns while mitigating unintended consequences. We need to build on the strengths 
and successes of our policy interventions in the past, recognise their weaknesses and 
gaps and address these, and, crucially, seize the moment to forge a common vision to 15 
take the society forward. A zero-sum conflict over existing resources and jobs will not 
provide South Africa with a unifying vision. We need to grow both the size of the 
economy and the number of decent work opportunities it provides. 
We outline below the details of a developmental package consisting of macroeconomic 
strategies, microeconomic measures and stakeholder commitments that can lead our 
society to a new growth trajectory and achieve a higher, sustainable expansion in 
decent work opportunities and in output based on our common efforts. 
The macroeconomic section of the package entails a careful balancing of more active 
monetary policy interventions to achieve growth and jobs targets, inter alia through a 
more competitive exchange rate and a lower cost of capital, with a more restrained 
fiscal stance and repriorisation of public spending to ensure sustainability over time. 
The microeconomic section in the package involves targeted measures to control 
inflationary pressures and support competitiveness and increased equity, which in turn 
makes the macroeconomic strategy sustainable and viable. It includes reforms in 
policies on skills, competition, industry, small business, the labour market, rural 
development, African integration and trade policy. 
The stakeholder commitments require a national consensus on wages, prices and 
savings in order to ensure a significant increase in the number of jobs in the economy 
while addressing the concerns of vulnerable workers and reducing income inequality. 
The commitments involve shared solidarity, sacrifice and partnership to shift society to 
the New Growth Path and achieve the goal of five million new jobs. 
We set out the details of the proposals separately below, but a crucial issue is their 
inter-relationship and the key tradeoffs they manage. An example of the need for 
coordinated responses is best illustrated with the case of the exchange rate. Measures 
designed to bring about a more competitive exchange rate may be undermined if all of 
the competitiveness gains are eroded by rising domestic prices and wages. That would 
limit the ability of producers to create more jobs by using the more competitively-priced 
currency to increase exports of South African goods into global markets or to reclaim a 
larger share of the domestic market. By extension, then, measures to address the 
currency must be paired with consistent efforts to avoid a price and wage spike as a 
result of the currency depreciation in order for the intervention to have the desired 
effect. 
Another example of the inter-relationship between different policy imperatives is the 
role of an African development fund as outlined below. Such a fund can promote 
investment in the region. At the same time, it can function as a sovereign wealth fund 
that invests accumulated foreign reserves in productive projects with a higher yield than 
investment in developed-country bonds. 16 
There is policy consensus on the need for a more competitive and stable exchange rate. 
Yet a more competitive exchange rate does not come “free”: it involves both explicit 
and hidden costs. Some of the costs – for instance, building up foreign reserves – entail 
diverting resources from other social needs. It is clearly necessary to strongly align 
macroeconomic measures, microeconomic interventions and social partner 
commitments in order to achieve the shared goals set out in the New Growth Path. 
3.2.1 The macroeconomic package 
In terms of the macroeconomic stance, for the foreseeable future government will be 
guided by a looser monetary policy and a more restrictive fiscal policy backed by 
microeconomic measures to contain inflationary pressures and enhance 
competitiveness. The package entails the following: 
1. The monetary policy stance will continue to target low and stable inflation but 
will do more to support a more competitive exchange rate and reduced 
investment costs through lower real interest rates. This will be accompanied by 
measures proposed below to contain inflationary pressures and build 
competitiveness. 
2. Additional and larger purchases of foreign currency flowing into South Africa, as 
a result of foreign direct investment and portfolio inflows, in order to counter 
appreciation of the rand as required. An African development fund will be 
established to invest in African infrastructure, as outlined below. A further set of 
tools to address the competitiveness of the exchange rate is being explored, 
including measures to address the negative effects of short-term capital inflows. 
These tools will take into account global agreements to deal with imbalances. 
3. Greater restraint in fiscal policy to slow inflation despite easier monetary policy. 
A counter-cyclical fiscal stance through the business cycle will manage demand 
in support of a more competitive currency while achieving critical public 
spending goals. The MTEF foresees real growth in expenditure of just over 2% a 
year for the next few years. 
4. Mobilisation of resources to finance growth path priorities, particularly jobs, 
skills and infrastructure. The new fiscal policy will require vigorous prioritisation 
and improved value for money, with reductions in less important areas while 
protecting priority public services. Spending proposals need to be subjected to a 
clear and rigorous prioritisation process, corruption and waste eliminated, and 
remuneration growth moderated to avoid squeezing crucial developmental 
programmes. 17 
3.2.2 The microeconomic package 
The microeconomic package involves ten programmes to control inflationary pressures 
and inefficiencies combined with more pro-active strategies to support an inclusive 
economy, social equity and regional development. Microeconomic measures to control 
inflationary pressures include: (a) competition policy as discussed below, targeting 
monopoly pricing on wage goods and basic industrial inputs; (b) a review of 
administered prices to ensure that they do not increase above inflation without 
compelling reasons; and (c) targeted, efficient and sustainable interventions to contain 
other volatile and/or rapidly rising costs, such as private healthcare and spikes in basic 
food items. Proposals to introduce National Health Insurance, for instance, should 
reduce the share of the GDP spent on health, which is now extraordinarily high for a 
middle-income economy, while improving access for the majority. 
Measures to support long-term competitiveness also include a range of measures 
discussed below, including skills development, vigorous implementation of IPAP2, small 
business support and labour-market interventions. They also require reduced red tape 
and bureaucratic delays as well as competitive pricing of broadband and ports and more 
efficient rail links to the coast. 
Mechanisms to reduce the cost of capital for the jobs drivers would involve mobilising 
savings around developmental investments, an initiative that would also contribute to a 
higher investment rate. In addition, government will assess how financing certain kinds 
of BEE requirements affects the cost of capital. The state will also seek to maximise local 
procurement in the state-owned enterprise (SOE) build programme so as to minimise 
the impact of currency depreciation on costs while enhancing domestic demand. 
One: Active industrial policy 
Industrial policy refers to public measures aimed at the development of certain kinds of 
activities in an economy. In South Africa, an active industrial policy is crucial because: 
• The historic dependence on resource extraction means that a range of government 
functions – infrastructure, education and training, industrial financing and regulatory 
frameworks – are not geared to supporting new employment-creating sectors. 
• Areas with employment potential often lack private-sector champions or supportive 
market structures, meaning that they require government encouragement. 
• New economic developments around knowledge-intensive sectors and green 
technologies need new kinds of education and training, greater R&D support as well 
as the establishment of learning organisations in enterprises and state agencies. 
Active industrial policies under apartheid relied largely on subsidies and tariffs for 
existing industries in the context of low-wage policies like migrant labour and 
suppression of trade unions. Responding to new global and domestic conditions in a 
democracy demands sharper focus on: 18 
• New sources of competitiveness that lie in innovation and productivity, with an 
adequate base in skills, infrastructure and efficient state action, and 
• Measures to enhance domestic and regional demand as well as extending export 
promotion strategically to the rapidly growing economies of the global South. These 
measures need a competitive rand to succeed. 
IPAP2 aims to ramp up South Africa’s active industrial policy by improving alignment 
across the state. Crucially, it is necessary that the state reforms institutional structures 
and uses financial engineering to significantly increase the capacity and impact of the 
development finance institutions (DFIs), especially the IDC, for industrial financing. In 
turn, the DFIs, and again especially the IDC, must ensure their activities maximise 
support for employment-creating, equitable and green growth. 
Two: Rural development policy 
The poorest regions of the country, with the highest unemployment rates and most 
vulnerable workers, are the former Bantustan and commercial farming areas. Areas 
considered rural today developed historically as impoverished labour reserves for the 
urban economy, and not as viable economic zones. Still, the agricultural value chain 
offers major opportunities in these areas for employment creation through smallholder 
schemes and the processing and sale of agricultural products. Improvements in 
livelihoods for rural dwellers are possible by upgrading farmworkers’ conditions and 
organisation and helping rural households increase production. Other jobs drivers, 
notably the public sector and social economy, tourism and infrastructure, can also 
contribute. 
An effective rural development strategy geared to improving livelihoods and 
employment on a large scale must: 
• Be rooted in a realistic understanding of the economic potential of different regions 
of the country, including the quality of land, water and proximity to markets; and 
• Take into account long-term changes in settlement patterns with the end of 
apartheid residential laws. 
Specific measures in these areas are proposed for rural development as a jobs driver. 
Core considerations will be: 
• Reprioritising budgets for housing and social services to address rural backlogs, 
which requires managing trade-offs and addressing gross inequalities in municipal 
revenues; 
• Support for market and financial institutions, especially co-ops, that enable small 
producers to enter formal value chains and take advantage of economies of scale; 
and 19 
• The identification of viable opportunities, including smallholder schemes, that can 
improve livelihoods on a large scale, especially by building on regional synergies and 
clusters. 
Three: Competition policy 
The South African economy has been characterised by high levels of economic 
concentration and collusion on price and market-sharing. Anti-competitive conduct 
seeks profits from narrow and backward-looking strategies based on inherited positions 
of market power. It ultimately implies lower output, investment and employment. 
Specific measure will include the following: 
1. Competition investigations should continue to focus on areas of strategic 
importance, including the food sector, construction and infrastructure, other key 
input costs, the green economy and the IPAP sectors. 
2. Law-enforcement agencies will cooperate more actively with the competition 
authorities to address pervasive breaches of the competition laws. 
3. The competition authorities will review their procedures to reduce the opportunity 
for vexatious litigation and speed up competition probes. 
4. More consideration should be given to mandating public interest conditions on 
proposed mergers, particularly in respect of employment and prices. 
5. Competition authorities should involve trade unions more, as provided for in the 
Competition Act. Unions should develop their capacity to share information and 
insights on employment issues in mergers and acquisitions. 
6. Government will consider draft amendments to the Competition Act to enhance the 
Tribunal’s power to order divestiture where inherited market power permits 
repeated abuse and to provide mechanisms to address pricing in markets 
characterised by economic concentration. 
7. The competition authorities and DFIs should cooperatively identify instances where 
support for new market entrants is needed to secure more competitive outcomes, in 
order to combine competition and investment measures. 
8. Government will develop guidelines for granting exemptions in terms of the 
Competition Act for cooperation between producers where it will demonstrably 
benefit job creation and expansion into export markets. 
Four: Stepping up education and skills development 
Improvements in education and skill levels are a fundamental prerequisite for achieving 
many of the goals in this growth path. General education must equip all South Africans 
to participate in our democracy and economy, and higher education must do more to 
meet the needs of broad-based development. The growth path also requires a radical 
review of the training system to address shortfalls in artisanal and technical skills. The 20 
draft Human Resource Development Strategy for South Africa addresses these goals. 
The proposals here focus on meeting shortfalls in the important economic skills. 
Engineers: Target at least 30 000 additional engineers by 2014, changing subsidy 
formulae for universities as appropriate. Strengthen measures to ensure greater and 
more equitable access to science and maths education at secondary level and expand 
bridging programmes to tertiary courses. 
Artisans: Target at least 50 000 additional artisans by 2015, with annual targets for 
state-owned enterprises. SETAs must agree to numerical targets for completed 
apprenticeships, with systems to track progress, particularly in construction, mining, 
manufacturing and new industries such as in the green economy. Apprenticeshipsystems must be reviewed to support broader access. 
Workplace skills: Improve skills in every job and target 1,2 million workers for certified 
on-the-job skills improvement programmes annually from 2013. Every SETA should aim 
to facilitate and co-finance training for 10% of the workforce annually. Improve SETA 
performance by strengthening governance, accountability and administrative systems. 
SETAs must prioritise identifying and funding the main sector skill needs based on the 
New Growth Path. 
Further education and training (FET) colleges have a central role in providing important 
middle-level skills for young people. An immediate goal is to expand enrolment at FET 
colleges, targeting a million students in FET colleges by 2014. To be effective, however, 
their graduation rates must also rise significantly. This target will require appropriate 
resourcing of the FET system. 
Information and communications technology (ICT) skills: The departments of education 
should ensure that computer skills are taught in all secondary schools and form part of 
the standard adult basic education and training (ABET) curriculum by 2015. All public 
servants should also receive ICT training. Achieving this aim urgently requires a plan to 
train educators, access relevant teaching skills elsewhere and establish computer
centres for learners and communities. 
Policy framework: Finalise the National Skills Development Strategy taking into account 
the needs emerging from the growth path. In addition, the overall supply of highly 
skilled labour should be increased by continued efforts to streamline the immigration 
system in ways conducive to the inflow of skills, linked to a skills-transfer programme 
and an on-going commitment to upgrade domestic education on a broad basis. 
Five: Enterprise development: promoting small business and entrepreneurship; 
eliminating unnecessary red-tape 
South Africa has a relatively weak small and micro enterprise sector. Before 1994, the 
state suppressed and marginalised black entrepreneurs. That history entrenched market 
and financial institutions, infrastructure and regulatory frameworks that were 
inappropriate for smaller producers, who also often lack production, financial and 
management skills. They also face the difficulty of competing with well-established firms 21 
in concentrated markets and accessing affordable finance and often suffer 
disproportionately from crime. 
The New Growth Path will strengthen and consolidate initiatives to support small and 
micro enterprise, with a comprehensive strategy laid out by early 2011. Core 
components will include: 
1. A one-stop shop and single funding agency for small and micro business established 
through consolidation of Khula, SAMAF and IDC funding, amongst others, to both 
improve access and reduce the overhead costs of government in order to make 
more resources available to end-users. 
2. To fully implement government’s long-standing commitment to pay small business 
suppliers within 30 days, with clear consequences for non-compliance by public 
entities. In addition to existing measures, government will consider a policy of 
“name and shame” and fiscal penalties for departments that do not pay small 
suppliers on time. 
3. To integrate small and micro enterprise support systematically into all sector
strategies. This is critical to ensure a space for smaller enterprise in the value chains 
of major industries and to support the development of clusters and sectoral 
regulations and market institutions that meet the needs of smaller producers. 
4. To initiate a red-tape elimination campaign to simplify regulated procedures and 
forms and remove any bias against smaller producers, for instance in zoning 
requirements, with results reported to Cabinet on a quarterly basis. 
5. To strengthen access to micro-finance for small enterprises in order to bring more 
citizens into economic activities and thus widen the enterprise pool in the country as 
one key step to promote the growth of new enterprises. 
6. To address smaller businesses’ concerns about access to and the cost of space in 
shopping malls. 
Six: Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment (BBBEE) 
Government has adopted the position that black economic empowerment (BEE) should 
seek to empower all historically disadvantaged people rather than only a small group of 
black investors. To this end, it adopted the Broad-Based BEE Act, which calls for 
expanded opportunities for workers and smaller enterprise as well as more 
representative ownership and management. 
Current BEE provisions have, however, in many instances failed to ensure a broad-based 
approach, instead imposing significant costs on the economy without supporting 
employment creation or growth. The present BEE model remains excessively focused on 
transactions that involve existing assets and benefit a relatively small number of 
individuals. The New Growth Path requires a much stronger focus on the broad-based 
elements of the BEE regulations – ownership by communities and workers, increased 
skills development and career pathing for all working people, and support for small 22 
enterprise and co-ops – as well as a new emphasis on procurement from local producers 
in order to support employment creation. 
The following shortcomings have emerged in the implementation of BEE. First, 
ownership and senior management issues receive disproportionate emphasis. The 
unintended consequences of this trend include “fronting”, speculation and tender 
abuse. Second, the regulations do not adequately incentivise employment creation, 
support for small enterprises and local procurement. The preferential procurement 
regulations aggravate this situation by privileging ownership over local production. 
Finally, the broad-based BEE regulations penalise public entities as suppliers. The 
democratic state owns public entities on behalf of our people yet the regulations do not 
count them as “black empowered”. 
A major re-think is needed of the BEE framework and policy to achieve South Africa’s 
developmental and growth goals. The dti and EDD will work with the relevant 
government departments and the BBBEE Advisory Council to ensure: 
• A substantial revision of the BBBEE Codes to do more to incentivise employment 
creation; investment in new productive capacity by black entrepreneurs, including 
small businesses and co-ops (using among others stronger local procurement); skills 
development and employment equity; collective and other forms of broad-based 
ownership; and sector strategies to create jobs. 
• Consistent implementation of broad-based (instead of narrow) BEE in all sectors, 
with a systematic assessment of the effects on the cost of capital and investment. 
• Continuous monitoring and evaluation of the impact of broad-based BEE on overall 
equity, employment creation, support for new entrepreneurs, growth and 
innovation. 
Seven: Labour policies 
The labour-market policies left by apartheid, which shaped racially based inequality and 
exploitation, could not provide the basis for a more equitable, inclusive and competitive 
economy. Government now regulates the labour market in order to protect vulnerable 
workers, support employment equity, ensure health and safety on the job and assist 
workers in finding employment and training opportunities. 
The New Growth Path can build on this foundation to find ways to raise multi-factor 
productivity on the basis of fair rewards to workers plus greater employment creation. 
Sustained growth in productivity is a source of competitiveness and an additional means 
of improving the conditions of work. It requires strong partnership at the shop-floor, 
and, in the South African context, a commitment to expand the market for goods and 
services in order to increase, rather than reduce, employment. 
A more rapidly growing economy will experience considerable changes in employment 
numbers over time. These developments need to be matched by public efforts to 
address insecurity experienced by individuals and their families. The unemployment 23 
insurance system will need temporary adjustments to its rules from time to time to 
extend or reduce the duration of benefits, on an actuarially-sound basis. Compliance 
with health and safety regulations to improve working conditions and support 
productivity growth may also need strengthening. 
In particular, government will pursue: 
1. A national Productivity Accord supplemented by sector and workplace productivity 
agreements. 
2. Legislative amendments to reduce workers’ vulnerability by addressing problems 
experienced in contract work, sub-contracting, outsourcing and labour broking and 
by including decent work considerations in the procurement process, consistent 
with the electoral mandate. 
3. Ways to limit abuse of the CCMA by senior managers and professionals who have 
access to other dispute-settlement systems but tie up the process with procedural 
points, and generally to further improve cost-effective services to workers and 
employers. 
4. Expanding the role of the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) in funding DFI efforts 
to create employment and extending employment services to assist unemployed 
people to find jobs. 
5. Improvements to the functioning of labour centres in order to improve information 
about employment and training opportunities. 
6. Measures to support the organisation of the unorganised, in particular farmworkers. 
Eight: Technology policy 
Technology policy requires some basic research, but even more it must secure myriad, 
often small and incremental innovations on the shopfloor, especially in employmentcreating activities. Support for this kind of emulation and adaptation was crucial for 
industrialisation in East Asia. 
Our technology policy has four main thrusts. 
Achieving targets for increased R&D: In line with current targets, raising public and 
private spending on R&D from 0,93% in 2007/8 to 1,5% in 2014 and 2% in 2018; 
increasing the number of patents from 91 in 2008 to 200 in 2014; increasing the number 
of professionals and technicians from the current seven per 10 000 people to 11. This 
will require costed and phased proposals from the relevant departments (DST, DHET, 
EDD and NT). 
Rapidly extending access to and use of ICT based on a continual and rapid reduction in 
broad-band costs, resulting largely from rapidly expanding undersea cables, and 
accelerated improvement in access to ICT training as well as social development and 
public policy applications. 24 
Adaptation and diffusion of technologies in targeted sectors to support employment 
creation and growth. Existing measures and institutions strengthened and scaled up to
support (a) rural development, (b) small and micro enterprises and cooperatives and (c) 
expanded broadband access across the economy. 
Maintenance of our technological edge in knowledge-intensive sectors. This process 
will be linked to IPAP2 as well as the targeted support strategies developed by DST. 
Nine: Developmental trade policies 
Trade policy seeks to promote exports while addressing unfair competition against 
domestic producers and assisting new activities to achieve competitiveness. South 
Africa’s trade policy should become more focussed, identifying opportunities for exports 
in external markets and using trade agreements and facilitation to achieve these. It 
must remain pragmatic and evidence-based in pursuing core socio-economic goals, 
particularly decent work and inclusive and balanced growth, without acceding 
unnecessarily to narrow interests or failing to respond to real economic needs. Trade 
policy will support balanced economic growth and build on the advantages won by a 
more competitive currency through: 
1. Monthly monitoring of trade with major economies to identify opportunities and to 
address unbalanced outcomes. 
2. Strategic interventions to maximise the benefits from trade relations with dynamic 
markets like China, India and Brazil and giving effect to the commitments in the SAChina Comprehensive Strategic Partnership for more balanced trade, greater exports 
of value-added manufacturing from South Africa and increased beneficiation at 
source. 
3. Programmes to establish a developmental trade model in Africa as discussed in the 
section on regional development below. 
4. Active support for new trade opportunities, for example specialised industrial 
products and ethical and organic goods. 
5. Targeted export promotion and other support for employment opportunities 
identified in the New Growth Path, particularly in agriculture, light industry and 
services. Export marketing should also provide strategic assistance to knowledgeintensive industries identified in IPAP2. 
6. Reciprocal commitments on applicants for tariff changes and rebates should be 
explored addressing areas of investment and employment creation. 
7. At the World Trade Organisation, South Africa will maintain efforts to advocate 
protection of policy space for development strategies, and resist rigid formuladriven reductions in industrial and agricultural tariffs that would undermine 
employment and growth. 25 
An effective trade policy requires effective enforcement by Customs, which in turn 
depends on improved resourcing and regulations, and active measures to combat illegal 
imports and smuggling. 
Ten: Policies for African development 
Support for regional growth is both an act of solidarity and a way to enhance economic 
opportunities. It demands above all that we address the shortcomings left by decades of 
colonialism and apartheid in logistics infrastructure, market institutions, regulatory 
frameworks and productive capacity on the African continent. South Africa should be 
the driving force behind the development of regional energy, transport and 
telecommunications infrastructure. 
Government will work jointly with African partners to identify mutually beneficial 
opportunities for trade and development, mindful of regional differences in resources 
and development. On this basis, South Africa will undertake initiatives to strengthen 
SADC and connect it with the East African Community and Comesa. We will identify key 
regulatory blockages to increased regional trade and investment by June 2011. 
Government will work with South African development finance institutions (DFIs) and 
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to address backlogs in regional logistics, water and 
electricity infrastructure. Government will launch an appropriately structured Africa 
Development Fund to assist in financing this kind of infrastructure, and at the same time 
play the role of a sovereign wealth fund in helping to achieve a more competitive rand. 
Priorities include: 
1. By 2012, developing and implementing proposals to improve the road/rail/ports 
system serving southern and central Africa. 
2. Strengthening regional integration on energy, including the Southern African Power 
Pool, linked to urgent improvements in electricity interconnectors, and exploring 
other opportunities for enhancing clean energy across central and southern Africa, 
including gas. 
3. Developing proposals to improve telecommunications and internet connectivity 
across the region and from the region to Europe, Asia and the Americas. 
The economic ministries will develop proposals for funding South African suppliers of 
capital equipment and construction materials for regional infrastructure projects. 
Government will work to identify viable new productive activities in the region, 
especially (a) in the agricultural value chain, including horticulture for South Africanowned retail chains; (b) electricity (hydro and other green energy generation); (c) 
beneficiation of minerals; and (d) integrated manufacturing supply chains. Proposals in 
this area should support development corridors across southern and central Africa. 
The relevant departments and universities will support regional education and 
healthcare improvements with appropriate use of South African capacity. 26 
3.2.3 A package of social partner commitments 
Not all of the steps required to secure the necessary employment and growth outcomes 
can be done by government. Social partners have a key role to play and a major 
contribution to make. Ensuring the benefits and sacrifices for the New Growth Path are 
equally shared requires extensive social dialogue. Commitments from stakeholders will 
shape the final package. To that end, government has made the following initial 
proposals: 
1. Efforts to retain the benefits of the competitive exchange rate and support the 
proposed macro stance through a broad development pact on wages, prices and 
executive bonuses, based on agreements: 
a. on wages, to moderate wage settlements for workers earning between 
R3000 and R20 000 a month, possibly to inflation plus a modest real 
increase, with inflation-level increases for those earning over R20 000 a 
month; 
b. on bonuses, prices and employment, 
i. to cap pay and bonuses for senior managers and executives 
earning over R550 000 a year, 
ii. to moderate price increases, especially on inputs and wage goods, 
and 
iii. to ensure that wage moderation and measures to support 
competitiveness lead to a measurable increase in employment 
creation; 
c. as government, (i) to maintain the real value of social grants and improve
the “social wage” in poor communities, including housing, healthcare and 
education, (ii) to reduce wage inequalities through efforts to improve 
pay, conditions and organisation for vulnerable workers (including those 
earning below the threshold set out above), and (iii) to ensure any 
increases in industrial financing creates large-scale employment. 
2. To improve levels of private savings in the economy and to respond to an initiative 
of organised labour, government will build on existing progress in discussions with 
both social partners to conclude a comprehensive social security system. Personal 
savings will be improved through proposed changes in the structure and regulation 
of retirement funds, including affordable compulsory membership for all employees. 
In addition, rules to limit withdrawals from contractual savings during a member’s 
working life, linked to increased investment in DFIs to finance employment-creating 
projects, will be pursued. 27 
3.3 RESOURCE DRIVERS
As a middle income country, South Africa has substantial resources and sophisticated 
financial markets. The New Growth Path must build on our strengths to redirect savings 
and investment toward productive and infrastructure projects in support of 
employment and sustained growth. That, in turn, depends on efforts to discourage 
unnecessary consumption and to encourage savings, and direct resources toward 
developmental aims. Fiscal policy must play a role through a counter-cyclical stance 
combined with substantial support for public investment. 
Government’s Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and annual budget will be 
guided by the need to support the New Growth Path through appropriate spending on 
infrastructure, skills, rural development and economic programmes. Local and provincial 
governments will undertake similar work. Considerable resources that are already 
allocated to public entities and departments are not always effectively utilised nor 
focussed on clear targets. The state often does not receive value for money in service 
delivery and procurement. Changing this in itself will release considerable resources for 
the growth path. 
Various public institutions, including the universities and science councils, DFIs and 
state-owned enterprises, have substantial resources that should be aligned with growth 
path priorities. 
EDD will work with Labour, Social Development and the Treasury to enhance personal 
and community savings through appropriate combinations of incentives, including 
retirement fund reforms. Treasury, working with the dti and EDD, will explore ways to 
disincentivise high personal debt, especially for luxury items and high-end property. 
Treasury and EDD will also consider how to incentivise company savings (defined as the 
resources invested, not paid as dividends) mostly by enhancing investment 
opportunities. 
The DFIs will review their activities to expand support for developmental investments. 
Government will explore ways to improve financing for these activities, including 
collaborating with organised business and labour on a development bond, consistent 
with the commitments at the Growth and Development Summit, which can mobilise 
resources from retirement funds; and utilising Government Employee Pension Fund 
(GEPF) and Public Investment Corporation resources. We can build on the experience of 
the current R2 billion Development Bond for job creation issued by the IDC and 
subscribed by the UIF. 
We will also explore the possibility of establishing a state-owned bank that is able to 
provide services in rural areas and support the development of community and cooperative banking. Such a bank could build on the institutional structures provides by 
the PostBank. It would play a central role in encouraging more appropriate forms of 
financial institution to serve micro-enterprise as well as historically marginalised 
households and communities in the rural areas as well as the cities. 28 
Finally, we can look to longer-term, more secure international financing. Possible 
sources include foreign direct investment, including support from retirement funds for 
developmental initiatives, as well as international donor funding for investments to 
green the economy. 
3.4 INSTITUTIONAL DRIVERS
The New Growth Path recognises the role of an effective, developmental state in 
achieving broad-based employment growth. This perspective raises at least three critical
institutional issues: the role of the state, the market and key market players, and social 
mobilisation and dialogue. 
3.4.1 The developmental state 
The growth path, while state-led, has to articulate well with market institutions. The 
challenge for the developmental state is to minimise costs for business except as 
required to support transformation toward a more equitable, decent work-generating 
and green economy. 
A developmental state is not simply hostage to market forces and vested interests. 
Through careful alliances, clear purpose and by leveraging its resource and regulatory 
capacity, it can align market outcomes with development needs. Achieving this aim, 
however, requires that it identifies economic challenges clearly and develops innovative 
solutions and then generates broad public support for these efforts. A key challenge in 
this light is to improve the state’s efficiency, effectiveness and responsiveness in the 
face of new opportunities and risks. The new outcomes-based performance monitoring 
and evaluation system provides a major new platform to achieve these aims. 
The growth path must step up the integration of national, provincial and local policies 
and collaboration around implementation of developmental policies and programmes. 
To this end, work is needed to align growth and development strategies adopted by 
different spheres of government and to establish knowledge-sharing and collaboration 
across the state. 
The New Growth Path will require some re-orientation from all state agencies, not just 
the national departments. Critical actors include the DFIs and SOEs; the GEPF and the 
PIC as crucial investors of savings; the Reserve Bank; the International Trade 
Administration Commission (ITAC) and Customs and Excise; the competition authorities; 
other regulatory, standard-setting and accreditation bodies including Cipro, Nersa and 
Icasa; and the science councils, universities and Mintek. 
3.4.2 Institutional drivers outside the state 
The main institutional drivers outside the state are business, organised labour and other 
civil society actors. 
In a mixed economy, private business is a core driver of jobs and economic growth. 
South Africa has benefited from the depth and capacity of its private sector, enabling 29 
innovative and strong responses to new challenges. Still, business has its weaknesses 
and has often been reactive and inwardly focussed. Too many business leaders have 
missed opportunities offered by the profound changes since 1994 or failed to 
collaborate adequately with other stakeholders. For its part, when business leadership 
has taken the initiative, government has not always responded adequately. 
Key to the implementation of the New Growth Path is the development of more 
constructive and collaborative relations between the state and business, where: 
• Government commits to minimise unnecessary economic costs, such as unnecessary 
regulatory requirements and delays, inadequate infrastructure, weak education and 
training, and 
• Business responds by supporting critical and innovative initiatives for a more 
inclusive and equitable economy, especially projects that can generate employment 
on a much larger scale, through investment, technical support and mentoring, and 
appropriate pricing policies. 
South Africa has also benefited from the strength of the progressive labour movement 
both before and since the democratic transition. The unions give voice to the working 
class, not just their members, and have an intimate knowledge of issues on the shopfloor and in their industries. They provide a critical resource in making and 
implementing strategies to achieve a more inclusive growth path. 
A critical challenge lies in maintaining union commitment to policies that support 
employment creation and equity even when it requires some sacrifice from union 
members. In order to achieve this, the New Growth Path must ensure that economic 
and social policies demonstrably reward any sacrifice by members with real gains for the 
working class as a whole. 
Broad-based organisations and NGOs beyond organised labour also have important 
roles to play in the growth path. In particular, they are critical to rural development, the 
green economy, education and training and the co-ops movement. This requires that we 
improve the state’s engagement style and address their capacity needs. 
3.4.3 Social dialogue and mobilisation 
South Africa has highly-developed social dialogue institutions and the social partners 
have a long history of dealing with complex and important issues – from the political 
transition to specific laws and regulations to broad agreements on growth and 
development. 
Social dialogue is a complex process where each party must bring something to the final 
agreement. As the Nobel prize-winning economist Amartya Sen notes: 
“A democratic search for agreement or a consensus can be extremely messy and many 
technocrats are sufficiently disgusted by its messiness to pine for some wonderful 
formula that would simply give us ready-made weights that are ‘just right.’” 30 
In South Africa, no technocratic solution – if it existed - could be imposed from above. 
We must develop this New Growth Path in conditions of active, noisy democracy. The 
deep inequalities that rend our society complicate efforts to reach consensus. 
This growth path requires that the state (a) facilitate national and workplace 
productivity accords, (b) support community organisation, including through the 
Community Works Programmes and other delivery mechanisms that build community 
and collective action, and (c) strengthen existing institutions for social dialogue, 
including Nedlac, sectoral and local forums. This work must critically enhance 
information flows, ensure government is more responsive to economic needs and 
reduce the transaction costs for our partners. 
3.5 IMPLICATIONS FOR PROVINCES AND LOCALITIES: THE SPATIAL DIMENSIONS OF THE 
GROWTH PATH 
Apartheid left South Africa with an extraordinary spatial divergence between the 
economic centres of the country, linked to the metro areas, and the densely settled 
rural areas of the former Bantustans, which have very limited economic resources and 
investments. Within metros, too, there are vast disparities and spatial challenges, with 
townships located far from most employment opportunities. A core task for the New 
Growth Path is to break with this legacy through a coherent approach to spatial 
development backed by strong investment in infrastructure and the identification of 
viable and sustainable opportunities for historically disadvantaged regions. Rural 
development will necessarily depend largely on links to the main urban areas. For
instance, smallholder schemes in the Eastern Cape can produce for factories in Port 
Elizabeth or East London; tourism in Mpumalanga relies primarily on visitors from 
Gauteng. 
Given the extraordinary differences in natural, economic and social conditions across 
our country, provinces and localities must adapt the broad drivers in the growth path to 
their circumstances. A spatial economic strategy will indicate how the jobs drivers affect 
different provinces, municipalities and rural areas, linking in to the rural development 
strategy and industrial policies. 
An important step will be to enhance communication between the spheres of 
government on their development strategies and to improve their alignment. As a start, 
EDD has begun work with other spheres of government to identify opportunities for 
them in the New Growth Path, taking their specific conditions into account. In this 
context, we need to recognise the importance of local governments in the metros in 
maintaining the centres of economic growth, as well as the need to strengthen the 
ability of municipalities generally to ensure efficient provision of services and licensing, 
aligned with the New Growth Path. 
In addition, government will develop a realistic spatial perspective on long-term 
settlement patterns and opportunities for employment creation and economic 
development. 31 
4 PRIORITIES, SEQUENCING, IMPLEMENTATION AND NEXT STEPS
Successful countries do not hinge action on the resolution of every possible concern or 
debate. Instead, they learn by doing, with a continual feedback loop that enables rapid 
responses to emerging problems. In words ascribed to Deng Xiaoping, development in 
China was, “just like crossing a river by groping for the stones beneath the surface.” We 
need to start implementation of key initiatives now, with strong monitoring and 
evaluation systems that can identify concerns and speedily remedy them as they arise. 
The implementation process must ensure the rigorous prioritisation of programmes and 
policies needed for inclusive, green growth. There are risks that the state must manage, 
among them the still fragile global recovery; competition and collaboration with the 
new fast-growing economies; and competing interests domestically. The management 
of these and other risks, as well as the enormous opportunities identified in the 
document, requires tight coordination and regular review. 
To start the implementation process, the following steps are being taken: 
1. Finalisation of the developmental policy package proposed in section 3.2.3 as the 
basis for engagement with key stakeholders; the main forum for reporting progress 
and monitoring implementation will be an Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) 
constituted by the President and Cabinet. 
2. Initiation of engagement on a social pact with key stakeholders, with 
implementation of the policy package following finalisation. 
3. In order to ensure clear decision-making and oversight, Cabinet Memoranda will be 
submitted: 
a. To each Cabinet meeting on progress in implementing the policy package, 
which will also identify new developments, risks and opportunities as they 
arise; 
b. Detailing implementation plans for each of the growth path areas, including 
the following areas, 
i. Strengthening competition policy 
ii. Procurement reform to support local procurement 
iii. Reform of broad-based BEE to support employment creation and 
broad-based equity and ensure alignment across all economic sectors 
iv. Stepping up skills development, including through reform of the SETA 
system and the National Skills Development Strategy 
v. African regional development 
vi. Tourism 32 
vii. Creation of employment through agriculture, agro-processing and 
rural development 
viii. Strategy for the green economy 
ix. Reducing cost drivers across the economy 
x. Long-run perspective on mining development, including directions for 
infrastructure and skills 
xi. Youth employment 
xii. Spatial development within South Africa. 
4. The outcomes-based methodology will be the basis for evaluating and monitoring 
the success of growth path interventions. The President has the prerogative to 
modify the current delivery and performance agreements with Ministers so as to 
integrate targets from the growth path proposals. 
5. For a learning process, it is crucial that in the process of implementation, 
a. Delivery forums be clearly identified to oversee progress and assist to 
improve programmes. The Economics Cluster, MinMECs and provincial 
forums, relevant SOEs and DFIs will undertake this, not new forums. 
b. Regular (at least quarterly) reports be made to Cabinet on key developments 
in the economy and on achievement of our core economic aims. These 
reports should propose ways to build on successes and anticipate problems 
in time to head them off. They must include early-warning systems to
indicate unforeseen economic difficulties, shortfalls in the anticipated 
employment creation and undesirable trends in overall equality. 
c. A similar monitoring system be established at Nedlac so that key 
stakeholders understand government programmes, help strengthen them, 
and assist in improving economic management. 
6. Economic development planning cannot exist apart from broader social and political 
progress. The NPC has a critical role in aligning the economic growth path with other 
social programmes and trends, such as demographics, migration, education and 
health planning and long-term infrastructure needs, among others. 
7. Priority setting is only meaningful if it allows us to identify what will not be done or 
financed. MinComBud and the Economics Cluster will work closely through the 
budget process to ensure that by the MTEF begins to reflect the key programmes 
and policies for the New Growth Path 
Given the complexity of the task, there are two core phases to implementation. 
Phase one: Laying the platform for the New Growth Path 
2010/11: Cabinet finalises priorities and sequencing with departments and ensures key 
steps are reflected in the budget. 33 
Immediate implementation of short-term measures promising significant rewards 
(“quick wins”), notably around the developmental policy package, as well as initiation of 
processes to lay the basis for sustained change in the economy. 
Establishment of monitoring mechanisms and implementation forums. 
Engagement with social partners on the vision and framework and work on the pact 
around the developmental policy package as well as productivity pacts. 
2012/13: In-depth review of progress and adjustment of policies as required. 
Phase two: Consolidation of the New Growth Path 
2014: Changes in the structure of production and ownership should begin to emerge in 
national statistics, and the state should be perceptibly more agile and responsive to 
economic needs. 
2015-2020: Continued implementation of programmes in ways that take into account 
past successes and changing conditions, with systematic monitoring and evaluation 
against clear targets. 34 
APPENDIX A . JOBS DRIVERS
JOBS DRIVER 1: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR EMPLOYMENT AND DEVELOPMENT 
Potential employment target 250 000 jobs a year in infrastructure (energy, transport, water, communications) and housing through 2015 
Where the jobs are Housing and public works construction, operation and maintenance; manufacture of inputs; improved competitiveness across the economy 
Main changes Stronger local procurement to maximise the economic multiplier; direct infrastructure consistently to support efficient, diversified and inclusive growth 
Core actions Maintain spending plans; increase local procurement through capacity development and regulatory change; develop models to encourage labourintensive construction where viable 
JOBS DRIVER 2: IMPROVING JOB CREATION IN ECONOMIC SECTORS 
Agricultural value chain Mining value chain Manufacturing Tourism & High-level services 
Potential 
employment 
target 
300 000 households in smallholder schemes 
by 2020; agro-processing anticipates creation 
of 145 000 jobs by 2020; upgrade employment 
on commercial farms (currently total of 
around 660 000) 
140 000 additional direct jobs in mining 
only, by 2020, and 200 000 direct jobs by 
2030 (initial projections by the IDC) 
350 000 by 2020 projected 
in IPAP2 (not including 
sectors put under other 
drivers) 
275 000 direct 
Where the jobs 
are 
Smallholder schemes in industrial products 
and forestry; export of wine and fruit; 
extension services 
Enhanced platinum group and coal exports; 
final manufacturing using base metal 
products 
As identified in IPAP2 Tourism 225 000 by 2015 and business 
services 50 000 by 2020; also cultural 
industries especially film, music and 
theatre 
Main changes Restructure land reform to support 
smallholder schemes with comprehensive 
support around infrastructure, marketing, 
extension, etc.; upgrade employment in 
commercial agriculture especially through 
improved worker voice; measures to support 
growth in commercial farming while 
addressing price fluctuations in maize and 
wheat 
Accelerate exploitation of reserves through 
measures to encourage; refocus 
beneficiation strategy on Stage 4 rather 
than smelting/refining 
Focus on sectors that can 
generate employment on a 
large scale and meet basic 
needs at lower cost in short 
to medium term, while 
sustaining development of 
more knowledge-intensive 
industries for long-run 
growth 
In tourism, strengthen measures to 
manage costs, quality assurance and 
logistics, and target opportunities for 
the youth; in business services, based 
on IPAP, enhance support measures to 
encourage diversification; ensure 
comprehensive support for cultural 
industries 
Core actions Review land reform to ensure maximise 
creation of livelihoods through smallholder 
schemes based on stepped up integration with 
economic and social programmes; identify 
options for stabilising food prices, especially 
maize; support farm worker organisation; 
strengthen AgriBEE support for rural coops; 
fast track land claims on commercial farms; 
Review regulatory framework, including 
measures around licensing and potential 
for state-owned company, to ensure they 
support employment creation, 
beneficiation, investment and broad equity 
Develop a ten-year strategic plan for 
electricity, logistics and skills for mining 
Identify the main potential of and 
Active industrial policy as 
described in policy section; 
productivity pacts at 
national, sectoral and 
enterprise level; improved 
output of relevant skills, 
especially engineers, 
designers and artisans 
New Tourism Sector Strategy to 
benchmark pricing, extend quality 
assurance and address logistics; 
industrial policy to identify ways to 
diversify business services; EDD, dti 
and DAC to develop comprehensive 
proposal to support employment 
growth in cultural industries, including 35 
address import pricing on farming inputs and 
improve logistics infrastructure; reduce delays 
in water licensing and EIAs for forestry; pursue 
existing plans for aquaculture, fisheries and 
agroprocessing; review processing and retail 
to improve markets for small producers 
blockages to stage 4 beneficiation 
(fabrication of metals into final goods) and 
develop measures to address them, 
including export taxes on metals where 
appropriate 
crafts, film, music and drama 
JOBS DRIVER 3: SEIZING THE POTENTIAL OF NEW ECONOMIES
The green economy Growing the knowledge economy 
Potential 
employment 
target 
300 000 additional direct jobs by 2020, of which 80 000 in manufacturing and the rest in 
construction, operations and maintenance, rising to well over 400 000 by 2030 
100 000 by 2020, based on estimated current employment and 
taking out overlaps with niche tourism, IPAP2 and public services 
Where the jobs 
are 
Natural resource management and construction in the short to medium term; renewable 
energy construction and manufacture of inputs in the medium to long run 
ICT, higher education, healthcare, “green” technologies, miningrelated technologies, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology 
Main changes Comprehensive support for energy efficiency and use of renewable energy; strategies to 
encourage domestic production of inputs, starting with solar-water heaters 
Stronger institutions to diffuse new technologies to SMEs and 
households; greater support for R&D and tertiary education
linked to growth potential; continue to reduce cost and improve 
access to broadband 
Core actions IRP to identify options for renewable energy generation, with appropriate regulatory changes 
to follow; development of green industrial support package with IDC as champion and special 
measures for SMEs and co-ops; codes for commercial buildings to reduce energy use and 
waste; social pact to support greening the economy; targeted skills development; public 
works to drive environmental programmes, including recycling and community cleaning; 
technology and fiscal policies to support diffusion of green technologies for households and 
enterprises 
Development of strategies to support employment creation, 
growth and exports in knowledge-based services and 
production, including strategic public investment where 
appropriate; technology and skills policy as discussed in policy 
section; support for Square Kilometre Array 
JOBS DRIVER 4:3: INVESTING IN SOCIAL CAPITAL
The social economy The public sector 
Potential 
employment 
target 
260 000 100 000 in the public service by 2020; targets for Expanded Public 
Works Programme (EPWP) and within that for Community Works 
Programmes (CWP); new youth scheme proposes up to one million 
young people in a special brigades 
Where the jobs 
are 
Co-ops (producer, worker, consumer, service and savings co-ops), social investment 
vehicles (union, community, religious), community and social initiatives 
Health, education and policing in the public service; social services; 
youth employment and community works programmes 
Main changes Comprehensive government support for social-economy initiatives based in changes 
in market institutions and service delivery systems, combined with targeted support 
for skills development, infrastructure provision and incentives 
Strategy to grow public-service employment to meet public needs, 
including lower-skilled auxiliary support; new youth employment 
scheme to complement existing EPWP and CWP; substantial 
expansion in CWP 36 
The social economy The public sector 
Core actions Development of a strategy to support social-economy organisations amongst others in 
obtaining marketing, bookkeeping, technological and financial services and training, 
and in developing linkages within the social economy to encourage learning and 
mutual support; work with union and community investment companies to develop a 
Charter with commitments to job creation; encourage state procurement from and 
service delivery through organisations in the social economy 
DPSA to work with line departments and Treasury to set targets for 
growth in the public service, particularly in health, education and 
crime prevention, including for auxiliary workers; programme by mid 
2011 for uptake of one million young people spread over a four-year 
period in rural, literacy, green and HIV-education brigades; explore 
possibility of expanding CWP to poorest 40% of wards 
JOBS DRIVER 5:4: SPATIAL DEVELOPMENT
Rural development African regional development 
Potential 
employment 
target 
Measurable improvement in livelihoods for 500 000 households, as well as
substantial new employment from increased construction and public employment 
plus growth in manufacturing and services 
Almost 60 000 additional direct jobs by 2015 and around 150 000 by 
2020 just from exports of goods to SADC; additional opportunities from 
service exports and collaboration around regional infrastructure and 
investment 
Where the jobs 
are 
Small-scale agriculture/livelihoods, construction, tourism and public services Export of manufactured goods and infrastructure inputs and services, 
finance, business and transport hub, integrated supply-chains 
Main changes Agreement on spatial perspective defining regional development options as basis 
for more targeted support for rural development; alignment of budget, 
infrastructure and economic development with spatial perspective; increased 
support for small-scale agriculture including community food gardens and support 
for marketing and service co-ops; expanded CWP in rural areas 
Development of strategy for improving logistics in southern Africa, with 
clear priorities and actions; targeted support for increasing regional 
investment and trade, including connecting infrastructure, reducing 
regulatory obstacles; establishment of a regional HRD strategy 
Core actions Development of spatial perspective by end of 2010 as the basis for establishing 
integrated long-term provincial infrastructure plans; measures to upgrade existing 
smallholders through provision of infrastructure, marketing support, extension, 
financial services etc.; programme to step up support for community gardens, 
including urban and peri-urban sites; set separate targets to address backlogs in 
education, health and municipal infrastructure in former Bantustans and for 
farmworkers; support for rural marketing, consumer, service and financial co-ops 
Detailed in policy section on African regional development